of a difference in tone patterning. So whereas we can classify
nouns according to their tone patterns, verbs cannot be so
classified. In the citation form, all verbs and all monosyllabic
subject and object pronouns are realised on the low tone. Although
a number of tonal alternations are attested in the verb, these are
usually motivated by the different grammatical configurations in
which they function. Consequently, all verbs with the same syllable
structure will behave alike in the same grammatical configuration.
For example, all monosyllabic verbs will behave alike in terms of
tone in a past tense construction and all disyllabic verbs will
also behave alike. For reasons such as these, Urhobo verbs as well
as monosyllabic subject and subject pronouns are assumed to be
underlyingly toneless and receive tone depending on the grammatical
configuration in which they function. As a result, tone bears a
great syntactic functional load particularly in the verb phrase. In
order to be able to analyse tonal alternations in the Urhobo verb
phrase, it is necessary to recognise the existence of tonal
morphemes (tomorphs) or grammatical tones as an essential part of
the grammar. These tomorphs may be single tone units or tonal
melodies, that is, fixed tonal patterns, which are grammatically
significant and exist independently of segmental strings. They are
quite distinct from lexical tones. They are obligatorily
segmentalised in appropriate positions within the grammatical
configuration and their segmentalisation often causes lexical tones
to delink or at best form a glide.
In this section, we shall consider grammatical constructions in
the three basic tenses, namely, the present, the past and the
future tenses.
The present tense
The present tense construction in Urhobo is used to convey a
habitual as well as a present or continuous action. The morpheme
marking the tense is a floating high tone, which occurs at the end
of the subject noun phrase. In order for this tomorph to be
realised, the final vowel of the subject noun phrase is lengthened
slightly to accommodate it. If the subject NP already ends on a