Grammatical tones
Grammatical tones are those tones, which are grammatically
significant and, within the autosegmental framework of generative
phonology, they exist independently of 'segmental'
phonological strings. They are mapped onto specific positions in
the grammatical constructions in which they feature and affect the
tonal output of the strings in the surface form. Tone exerts a lot
of influence on the grammar of Urhobo as most of the grammatical
information available is revealed through the manipulation of
tones. For instance, most tense and aspectual information are
indicated by tones. The segmentalisation of these grammatical tones
usually results in the modification of lexical tones borne by
adjacent segments. We shall consider a few of them.
Tone in the associative noun phrase
The associative construction is also called the Noun + Noun
phrase. This construction is indicated by a morpheme /re/ which
bears a high tone and occurs between the two nouns. In normal
conversational speech, the vowel of this associative marker (AM) is
always elided but its high tone remains and gets relinked on the
prefix vowel of the following noun and this results in tonal
modifications on the second noun. Let us consider a few
examples:
From the examples above, we notice that while the first nouns in
each phrase retain their lexical tones, the prefix vowels of the
second nouns are all realised on the high tone given them by the
associative marker. Consequently, examples 6(a), (b) and (d) whose
second nouns in their citation form begin with a low tone become
high because the high tone of the associative market relinks on
their prefix vowel. Thus, we have a tonal modification from low to
high. In 6(c), because the second noun already bears a high tone,
no tonal modification takes place because the two high tones merely
contract into one high tone.
Tone in the verb phrase
Most simple verbs in Urhobo are either monosyllabic or
disyllabic and begin with a consonant segment. There are no minimal
pairs in the verb class, which differ in meaning only as a result