with petroleum exploration and exploitation and these have led to
wide scale pollution of its farmlands (soils), rivers and
underground water with hydrocarbons and dispersant
products1.
Crude oil spillages on soil and indiscriminate discharge of
effluents on farmlands contaminate the soils and water bed making
them polluted and unsatisfactory for agricultural
purposes2. Crude oil spillage exerts
adverse effect on plants by making toxic minerals in the soil
available to plants and by reducing the soil pH; when soil pH drops
below 4.50, the productivity of most crops are adversely
affected3,4. As the people of Rivers and
Bayelsa States are predominantly subsistent farmers, the bulk of
plant nutrients (carbohydrate, fats, proteins, ash, moisture and
fibre) in their diets are derived from the consumption of staple
foods, (starchy root tubers, cereals and legumes).
Foods are required by humans for growth, development,
reproduction and energy. The poor nutritional status of Nigerians
and malnutritional disorders are as a result of complex factors
such as pollution, low productivity and quality and the presence of
toxicants in foods which need to be destroyed by heat treatment.
For instance, heat treatment has been shown to inactivate trypsin
inhibitors from the African yam
bean5.
Yams are species of Dioscorea and belong to Dioscoreacea family
propagated from tubers and grow best in deep well drained soils.
They are pealed, boiled and pounded to produce a gelatinous dough
called pounded yam which is consumed with soup. Yam flour as a
local soup thickener is used to prepare afiaefere or white
soup6, and is a good source of
starch6,7. Cassava (Manihot
esculenta) is a root crop that belongs to the family
Euphorbiacea and is propagated from stem cuttings. The root is a
cheap source of carbohydrate for human and livestock.
Fermented cassava roots are boiled and pounded into a thick
paste called fufu which is consumed with
soup. The root can be cooked and eaten with red palm oil and
sauces. The roots may be peeled, grated, fermented and fried with
or without red palm oil into garri flour in which form it is mainly
consumed in Nigeria6. Taro cocoyam