their beam centers intersect and contain precipitating particles.
Many options of interference geometries are possible.
This paper considers a situation in which a satellite down link
signal is interfered by the signal from a terrestrial microwave
network operating at the same frequency as the satellite system.
When this happens, there is usually a decrease in the
signal-to-noise ratio at the satellite terminal as a result of
energy re-directed in the forward direction into its receiving
antenna system.
The evaluation of the received interference power is important
for the design of microwave communication systems. Several attempts
have been made in the past to quantify interference levels either
by the direct measurement or by simulation. Among such efforts are
Crane, (1974), Awaka, (1989), Olsen et al., (1993), Holt et al., (1993), and
Capsoni and D’Amico, (1997). The efforts yielded good results in
the temperate regions. In the tropical regions, very limited
efforts have been made to address this problem. Ajewole et
al., (1999a) and Ajewole (2003) studied the
problem using radio-climatological data from Nigeria to predict
interference levels on propagation paths in Nigeria.
Despite the large volume of work already carried out on the
subject in temperate regions, the results obtained in such studies
are always inadequate on tropical paths. This is because the nature
and characteristics of tropical rainfall are occasionally different
from those of the temperate rainfall. For instance, tropical
rainfall is most often convective, is characterized by large
raindrop sizes, is of high intensity and often times accompanied by
severe lightning and thunderstorm. If a convective rain cell passes
over the common volume formed by the intersecting beams of a
satellite downlink antenna and a terrestrial microwave relay
system, interference will be received in the satellite system so
long as the frequencies are the same. Further, the satellite signal
suffers additional rain attenuation (Figure 1) on its path hence,
the statistics of the transmission loss alone will not be
sufficient to predict the interference received by the wanted
satellite channel. This additional attenuation has the potential to
further reduce the signal-to-noise ratio at the satellite terminal.