Description of the Experiment
The reservoir tank was filled with water. The rising pipe of
varying uniform diameter series (10mm – 25mm) was positioned in the
reservoir tank with the air line in place.
The pipe submergence was then measured and thereafter the air
was pumped into the injection point of the riser pipe. The lift of
the pump (liquid height above static level) was then measured.
The experiment was repeated five times and thereafter another
riser pipe of different diameter is put in place and the experiment
repeated all over again.
When all the uniform rise pipes had been used, the liquid in the
reservoir was change to kerosene and then gasoline and later to
liquid water-solid. For each case the whole experimental runs were
repeated all over again.
RESULT AND DISCUSSION
Tables 1 (a-c) showed the results obtained when the experiment
was run with kerosene. The air pressure was varied from13.8
kN/m2 to 172.4kN/m2 and submergence
from 30cm to 25cm. The graphical plot of the lift against
submergence ratio (submergence/total liquid depth) for different
fluids is shown in figure 2. It was observed that the pump lift
increases with increasing pipe submergence ratio. This should be
expected, since a greater height of the fluid will be required to
restore back to equilibrium for high pipe submergences.
A plot of the pump lift (height) against pressure for different
liquids is presented in Figure 3. By examining Table 1 it could be
observed that the smaller riser pipe yielded higher lift than the
pipe of higher dimensions. The slippage seems to be well pronounced
in bigger diameter pipes.
The results obtained when a mixture of sand and water was used
are presented in Table 2 while a graphical representation is shown
in Figure 4. From the results it was observed that for all the air
pressures and different submergence, the correspondent lift is
lower comparative to the other pure liquids. The mixture is
obviously denser and of considerably low cohesive properties that
the other pure liquids.
Based on all the aforementioned observations, it could be
deduced then that the liquid