EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AIR LIFT PUMP
ABSTRACT:- Air lift pump has been
predominantly used for lifting of waste-water, aggressive fluid,
transportation of solids and radioactive fluids in nuclear
recycling plants and also for deep sea mining. The air lift pump
performance depends on some fluid and geometric properties.
Experiments were carried out by setting up a model air lift pump to
unearth some of these parameters and their influence on the
performance. Thereafter a Lift Dimensionless Number (LDN) and Pump
Dimensionless Number (PDN) were derived to capture all the flow
parameters. Using the experimental results obtained a logarithmic
plot of the dimensionless numbers was obtained to established a
relationship between the dimensionless numbers. It was generally
observed that air lift pumps with smaller riser pipe diameters
yielded higher lifts. From the experiment it was also noted that
fluid with better adhesive properties (e.g. water)
produced higher lifts. For all cases of injection pressures for
different fluids and mixture of fluid and solid, the lift increased
with increasing submergence. A logarithmic plot of LDN against PDN
yielded a slope 0.22 and intercept -0.78. The study
has therefore been able to generate dimensionless parameters for
characterizing the lift pump.
INTRODUCTION
The air lift pump has been used for several years in the lifting
of waste water, water aggressive fluids and also for transportation
of solid mixture and for radioactive fluid in nuclear recycling
plants(Weber, 1982).
The method also appears well suited for deep-sea mixing provided
the influence of the entrance air expansion on the degree of
efficiency and on the lifting power of the air-liquid mixture is
not too adverse. The usage of air lift pump for sampling Juveline
Salmonds was reported by Brege et
al(1990).
The great variety of applications and nearly unlimited plant
dimension requires a scientific base in order to guarantee an
optimal computation for each special
case.As such there have been many concerted efforts to
fully characterize the pump.
Versluys(1931) was the first to give a general theory.
There have been many theories developed since then. However some
notable experimental works have equally been carried out. For