Thus the additional attenuation is the basis of the evaluation of
the effective transmission loss on the path, and whenever it
becomes larger than the link margin may result in the total outage
of the satellite channel no matter the interference levels received
from the terrestrial system. It is therefore important to consider
this extra attenuation of the wanted signal in the analysis of
intersystem interference, if the correct interference levels are to
be determined for the purpose of better planning and design of
microwave communication systems in these locations.
The present study investigates hydrometeor scattering in
additional locations inthe
equatorial belt of Africa; Douala- Cameroon (9.70oE, 4.05oN), and Nairobi- Kenya (36.75oE, 1.30oS). The study then computes
interference in the locations in terms of the effective
transmission loss and compares the results obtained with Ile-Ife,
Nigeria (4.34oE, 7.33oN).
THEORETICAL CONSIDERATIONS AND INPUT PARAMETERS
The effective transmission loss is defined as the transmission
loss minus the extra attenuation suffered by the wanted signal
(Capsoni and D’Amico, 1997). It is usually evaluated on the basis
of a joint and conditioned statistics of the transmission loss and
the extra attenuation. It is therefore expressed as
L is the transmission loss defined as the
ratio of the interfering transmitted power
Pt to the interfering
received power Pr at the
interfered station, and is evaluated using the Bistatic Radar
Equation (BRE). Aw is the extra attenuation
on the wanted signal. Using the simplified form of the BRE (Capsoni
et al., 1992), the transmission loss is
expressed as
and the term CV which denotes the common volume formed by the
interfering beams which is evaluated from the following integral
From equations (2.3) and (2.4) and Figure
1,At
(R1) and
Ar
(R2) are the attenuations
along the pathsR1 from
the transmitter to the common volume, and
R2 from the common volume
to the satellite receiver.
Ag is the attenuation due
to gaseous absorption. Gt
and Gr are the
transmitter and receiver antenna gains, and λ is the wavelength of
the radio signal. The quantities
Ft
(ύ1,
Ǿ1) and
Fr
(ύ2,
Ǿ2) represents the