INTERSYSTEM INTERFERENCE DUE TO HYDROMETEOR SCATTERING ON
SATELLITE DOWNLINK SIGNALS IN TROPICAL LOCATIONS
INTRODUCTION
The use of communication satellites to provide new
telecommunication services and to expand existing ones continues to
receive international support and patronage.
Integrated services digital networks (ISDN) connection via
satellite for telephoning and data communication, internet services
relying on very small aperture terminal (VSAT) systems, satellite
television, remote sensing of the environment and so on are typical
services which depend on satellite communication for reliable and
efficient service delivery. In Sub-Saharan Africa, these services
are still evolving and if well managed, have the potential to
assist the region to catch up with modern information age.
Many of the communication satellites in use operate at
frequencies, which are at the same time being used to provide other
terrestrial telecommunication services such as terrestrial
telephoning and television broadcast. This has brought about
phenomenal amount of pressure on the available bandwidth thus
leading to bandwidth congestion at the lower frequencies. Moving to
the higher frequencies greater or equal to 10 GHz to gain some
bandwidth has been at some cost to the quality of the wanted
satellite channel. As frequency becomes higher, signal degradation
due to interaction with hydrometeors also becomes stronger.
Hydrometeor induced signal attenuation and scattering, signal
depolarization, intersystem interference could become very strong
at frequencies higher than 10 GHz. For example rain scattering is
severe at these frequencies, because the size of the raindrop is
comparable to the wavelength of the signal.
Also atmospheric gases, that is, dry air (oxygen) and water
vapour have a combined strong specific attenuation in the frequency
window 22.2-30 GHz (ITU-R, P. 676-5, 2003).
When the common volume formed by the intersection of the
terrestrial and satellite signals lay in the bright band (melting
layer), reflectivity decreases at the rate of 6.5 dB/ km in
this region leading to strong ice scattering and attenuation of the
satellite channel. A weak satellite signal at the reception point
is susceptible to severe interference from a strong terrestrial
system operating in its neighbourhood at the same frequency if