instance Heywood et al(1981)
reported experimental investigation of air lift pumping of shear
thinning suspensions. Similarly attempt was reported by Nigel et
al(1981). Wurts et al (1994)
determine the individual and combined pumping capacities for
floating air lift pump powered by a centrifugal blower. A physical
based model was developed by Francis (1996) to determine the air
flow rate required to pump a specific flow rate of water in a given
well designed for in-well air stripping of volatile organic
compound from an aquifer. An experimental study of air lift pump
with tapered up-riser pipe was carried out by Kumar et al (2003).
They reported improved performance with a tapered riser pipe. The
pump performance of a small air-lift system for conveying solid
particles was investigated experimentally by Hitoshi Fujimoto et
al(2003). The quasi-steady state
characteristics of the flows were examined for various experimental
conditions The critical boundary on which the particles can be
lifted is discussed in detail using a simple theoretical model Some
numerical approaches that have been attempted includes simulation
of vertical conveying of solid by Weber (1982) and the use of
integral model by Nenes et al (1996) . The integral model was used
to simulate air lift pump for moderate deep water well by varying
parameters such as pressure and void fraction. They reported close
agreement with experiments.
The basis of this work is however to develop some dimensionless
relations from experiments that can be used to characterise the
lift pump.
EXPERIMENTAL SET UP
In order to determine the various factors governing the
performance of an air-lift pump experiments were performed using a
model rig as shown in Figure 1.
The rig consists of a reservoir tank made of transparent plastic
material, in which stands the rise pipe (10mm – 25mm) also made of
transparent plastic material. The air line is connected to the rise
pipe and linked to the air compressor. The height of the liquid
above the state level is referred to as the lift while the
submergence is the length of the air pipe submerged below the
static level.