or false response which cannot always be true or false. That is to
say, the utterance can be interpreted as true under a set of
conditions in a possible universe and false under another. Lyons
(1977:.169) observes: "it there is a possible
world in which a sentence is both true and false, we can say that
the. sentence expresses two district propositions.
Also seen as a problem in meaning analysis is the fact that what
does not exist for a particular person or people, does not feature
in their speech and has no name or meaning for them (Udofot
2004:.136). What this means is that object to which humans
refer in their utterance have meaning only when they are within
their knowledge. They may not necessarily be objects that exist. If
such objects are mentioned outside the knowledge of the hearer(s),
it brings a serious problem in its analysis.
In the same vein, absence of the shared knowledge, as well as
the beliefs, conventions and presuppositions between the speaker
and the hearer can cause a very serious problem in the analysis of
the meaning of a given utterance. The presence of these contextual
features is important for a proper interpretation of an
utterance.
Another problem associated with meaning analysis is subjectivity
and introspection of concepts. It is difficult to have objective
meaning of words and utterances if everyone has to look into the
mind. Haas (1973:.20) said 'an empirical science
like linguistics cannot be content to rely on a procedure of
looking into their minds; each into his own". Also,
some theories define meaning in terms of "symbol - Image -
Referent relationships" which only apply to concrete things
not obstructions. For instance, one cannot see the mental picture
of liberty, air; courage
courage and so on.
Moreover, the fact that people have different ideas about things
is a problem in meaning analysis. Udofot (2004) has it that "a
well described picture can be perceived differently by different
people depending on their intellectual capacities, power of
imagination and backgrounds ( p62).