INTRODUCTION
The study of meaning is a tasking exercise. Meaning has been
viewed as the most elusive and controversial phenomenon in language
study. Its' vague nature gives
room for diverse interpretations depending on the speaker, the
hearer and the situation. Philosophers, anthropologists and
linguists have tried to give solution to the unstable and ambiguous
nature of meaning but could not. It is because of the status of
meaning, certain problems associate with its analysis in natural
languages. Several theories of meaning have been propounded to
address these problems. This paper therefore aims at discussing
some problems associated with the analysis of meaning and a current
theory which has reasonably addresses these problems.
PROBLEMS ASSOCIATED WITH THE ANALYSIS OF MEANING IS
NATURAL LANGUAGES.
There are certain problems associated with the analysis of
meaning in natural languages. Some of the problems are discussed
below. The problem of graded boundaries hinders proper analysis of
meaning in natural languages. Jackendoff (1996) cited in Udofot
(2004:.140) observe that:
In talking about the colour "red" in
English one is faced with a broad range of lavender so that at a
point one may have a problem of hues from orange to lavender so
that at a point one may have a problem of noticing where orange
stops and lavender begins...
According to her, there is also borderline case where a
particular colour can be seen as red, orange or lavender depending
on the context. Similar problems exist for a word like
fat: What for instance is the lower boundary of
a fat woman? When or at what size can a woman be described as thin,
medium or fat? are relevant to the problem of graded boundaries.
Ambiguity is another problem
encountered in the analysis of
meaning in natural languages. Ambiguous words or utterance are
those open to diverse interpretations depending on the linguistic
context. For example the expression "she is nice", calls
for different interpretations. The word
"nice" could mean
"caring, kind, accommodating, beautiful,
and other virtues. Another aspect of ambiguity of utterance is
seen, when an utterance is seen, when an utterance requires a true