A person who has not experienced an eclipse of the sun can never
arrive at having a clear image of it no matter how well it is
described. Potter (1957) in his summation had it "that
many people think through movements, gestures, ritual acts and many
other ways instead of seeing with the mind's eye.
Also, not all concepts are observable. This is viewed as a
problem in meaning analysis. As earlier stated, abstract nouns for
instance, are not observable. To explain a word like
"nice" one would say something like
beautiful, hand
some, charming," assuming that the
hearer already knows in his mind the meaning of these words. In
doing this one has to go to the mental bank where the meanings of
the words used in explaining another word are stored.
Furthermore, interpreting meaning based on the
in image visualized by the hearer is a
shortcoming in meaning analysis. Here meaning is conceptualized in
terms of the image that a particular object calls up in the mind
which is associated with the world. The image conceptualized may be
false. For instance, the difference between a hen and duck can
easily be visualized by calling up their images but scientifically
one would have to resort to descriptions using such terms as + LONG
NECK (Udofot 2004:.142).
It could also be however established as a problem the situation
where propositions vary depending on the time and place of
utterance. This means that every utterance occurs in a particular
spatio-temporal situation (Lyons; 1968:.413). This consist of
the speaker, the time of speech, the person spoken to, the action
of the speaker and hearer at the time and the other object and people also present. Lack of knowledge of all these can
seriously hamper meaning analysis.
Finally, a problem is viewed where many expressions used in
natural languages do not have single referents. For instance, the
expression "that young-man is my brother". One cannot
maintain whether a true or false proposition is expressed without
considering who the speaker and the reference. Also one may not