“If Mnet, which is not a Nigerian company, would go all the way
to do what they have done, I think our own television stations
should begin to do something about putting their money into things
like this. They may be able to do it better than the foreign
stations are currently doing,” he said.
However, he said the totality of what “we describe as culture is
encapsulated in the dance art. Dance communicates every facet of
our lives as human beings and in combination with oral tradition,
oral poetry; dance is used as a tool to communicate tradition and
culture from one generation to another. So, apart from the
potential of dance for economic development, it’s an art you can
live on for the whole life.
“Dance is an integral part of your art; flexibility is not just
an integral part of dance but also an art form of the entire dance
programme. Whatever your involvement in dance is, major, minor, or
part-time enthusiast, you can choreograph your own dance steps.
Let's Dance is a soulful journey into the heart of Nigerian
culture. Let's Dance provides a unique platform to showcase
the richness of our culture, it provides an opportunity for the
dancing couples to understudy musical cultures from other lands
while they work to master their own.
"Audience learnt some vital lessons through Let's
Dance. First, every dance has a thematic preoccupation. Two, dance
is a fusion of styles. Three, the love of song and dance is common
to all tribes of Nigeria. Four, in dance always put your best foot
forward. Five, when you dance, remember to blend good
characterisation with good level of carriage. All in all,
Let's Dance provides total entertainment for Nigerians,” he
said.
Suddenly, it has become fashionable to dance, even very
rewarding to have more than a passing knowledge of dance. It
doesn't matter if such familiarity is in theory or practical.
The dividend may be less satisfying but lecturers, who teach dance
in the universities, will attest to how dance has gone through a
full circle.