concept of masks, he explained is about festivity and celebration
“This works were made to actually document the African tradition
for posterity.” Fragment of Tradition he further explained is to
let people know how elders in the society are recognized.
At the preview of the works last week, the artist revealed that
the exhibition is significant in the sense that it offers him a
platform to fully transform his thoughts and perceptions into a
vision of what he believes art should be.
Culture and environment plays important role in Adeyemi’s works
and he believes that reflection of culture and past experiences
coupled with a constant desire to pursue new ideas has yielded
rewarding creative harvest. “My works thus reveal my passion for
artistic exploration of the world around me. The present level of
my work is characterized by semi-abstraction with images becoming
more complex through the free use of other elements making the
recent works more qualitative in thematic, stylistic and formal
rendition,” he added.
Adeyemi who received tutelage from renowned art masters like
Professor Yusuf Grillo, Bruce Onabrakpeya, S. I Wagboje, Dan
Ikhu Omovbude and Dr. Fowowe among others, has been
variously described by friends and associates as a bridge builder,
tireless listener and a very creative artist. In the words of Oshin
Ademola of the National Gallery of Art, Lagos, Adeyemi’s skills can
be compared to those of the masters. “His unquenchable quest for
knowledge no doubt is one of the reasons the art world is
experiencing dramatic changes in his styles.”
One positive aspect of Adeyemi that many art stakeholders often
cite is his philanthropic nature. “We admire his philanthropic
nature. Two years ago, after his exhibition in our gallery, he
donated several of his works to the Federal Orthopaedic Hospital,
Igbobi,” Moses Ohiomokhare, Curator Quintessence gallery said. He
added: “This year, to celebrate his fifty years on earth, he is
offering scholarship to some students and launching his book.”
“Kunle Adeyemi takes care of other peoples problems more as
priority than his own financially or otherwise,” Adeyoro a