Between museum and public
Until very recently, museum contents were largely information
based with dates, places and facts serving as the norms. But
curators have now began experimenting with new ways of presenting
collections that they hoped, would more effectively reach their
target audience.
Director of Network Museums, John Cotton Dana, observed that
more important to what are displayed in museums is how it was used.
He established many common practices to increase the museum’s
usefulness, through loaning objects to school classrooms, shops,
hospitals, creating a teacher-training course at local college,
opening a junior museum for the children only and establishing
branch museums in local libraries.
In the past, museums in Nigeria sat and waited for the public to
come visiting. Such visits were usually conducted by museum
education officers, who took visitors, who are often times passive
listeners, round the galleries. This practice did not help in the
effective interpretation of objects and did not give room for
public active participation in museum matters.
The museum in Nigeria is no longer sacred or untouchables,
rather, the museum is open to scrutiny, for within its walls and
from an increasingly discriminately public. The process of
rethinking the museum has brought intense examination of values and
assumptions and the scope and nature of services offered.
At the heart of this new trend is the desire by museum
professionals to position the museum to be relevant and to provide
the best in society, that is, to teach and advertise. This has of
necessity made some museums in Nigeria, with Lagos Museum taking
the lead begin to form an alliance with several teaching agencies,
the public and private schools, the colleges and universities and
the art institutions.
In Nigeria, majority of museum visitors are school children and
university undergraduates. That is why some programmes are designed
to stimulate in the children, and adults alike, both intellectual
and cultural ideas that redefine some museum activities like
interpretation of objects and their significances, ethnic bias and
self identification.
The museum today involves the public in all its activities. In