The Untapped Culture of Dance
There are different types of music that are influenced by
western culture. Dr. Rasaki Ojo-Bakare, theatre director and
choreographer, University of Abuja is re-awakening a call for
Nigerians to take pride in things that's theirs.
Chinyere Okoye writes
Dance and music are perhaps the two most vibrant forms of
Nigerian art. It includes many kinds of folk and popular music
which is dependent on strong rhythms supplied by countless drums
and percussion instruments. Nigeria is rich in varied cultural
heritage derives from the mixture of its different ethnic groups
with Arabic and western cultural influences. Music and dance are
integral to Nigerian culture, and each ethnic group has its own
specialties. Traditional instruments include various types of
flutes, trumpets, musical bows, xylophones, and wooden clappers, as
well as many varieties of drums.
Dance in Nigeria has many varieties,
Ubakala shows their value system, and
helps resolve conflicts, and also institutes changes.
Ishan stilt dancers, dances in colourful
costumes and twist themselves in the air, while one Tiv dance,
called ajo, features male dancers who work
in pairs, and another involves teams of women who perform a dance
called icough by composing songs about
current events.
Dancers for the Ekiti, Yoruba wear head masks and they do
processional dances. The Hausa, who do not consider dancing to be a
craft, divide their dances into the categories of social dancing
and ceremonial bòorii dances.
Nigerian culture is as multi-ethnic as the people in Nigeria.
Nigerians still cherish their traditional languages, music, dance
and literature. Nigeria comprises of three large ethnic groups,
which are Yoruba, Hausa-Fulani and Igbo. However there are other
ethnic groups as well. Thus culture in Nigeria is most positively
multi-ethnic. Culture of Nigeria gives a lot of value to different
types of arts, which primarily include ivory carving, grass
weaving, woodcarving, leather, calabash, pottery, painting, cloth
weaving and glass and metal works.
For Bakare, a foremost playwright among the third generation of
Nigerian, an associate professor in the Theatre Arts Department of
the University of Abuja, was in the panels of the recent