The Play Awhangan
Awhangan is a true life historical struggle of ancient people of
Agbathegreme, how a military war-lord in a battle celebrated
victory of collectivism, unity, brotherhood, courage and above all
the will-power of the masses in the face of raw might and odds
displayed by dictators and tyrants. A hero of repute and daredevil
warrior, the fearless stone, and the husband of the Tigress was
used as a tool of revenge to unseat the
Aholu (king) to settle an old score. This
bait degenerated into unseating the Warrior, though Awhangan was
successful as a warrior, but not as a king.
The play celebrates traditional democracy in a historical drama
of heroism, greed, allegiance and betrayal of trust; a people’s
collective will to resist tyranny without any form of violence.
Peter Olaide Mesewaku (B.A) is a native of Badagry,
Southwest Nigeria and a graduate of Theatre Arts University of
Ibadan. A playwright, he’s presently a curator of the Badagry
Heritage Museum.
The Play Awhangan raises many rhetoric questions, which are what
is the fate of a people who forgets their past? What future awaits
a race that keeps its history in the garbage heap? What quality of
leadership lies ahead of a nation which fails to tutor its youths
about their past heroes?
Some plays written by Prof. Wole Soyinka, Ola Rotimi,
Femi Osofisan and many others have taught Nigerians, Africans at
large great lessons in history and human experience. No other field
of learning can equal the theatre in the total contents of its
contributions.
In a famous lecture, a profound historian, Prof. Kenneth
Dike said “People who are not aware of their past cannot
understand the present and will be ill equipped to deal with the
future”. Hence, it is imperative in the life for people to
take note of important events as a matter of necessity and document
it for posterity sake.
President Barack Obama must have been inspired by the evergreen
thought-provoking and futuristic oratory of Martin Luther King. His
ascendancy therefore is the Africa-American dream comes true. This