Mnet's “Let's Dance” reality television show. The show
was designed to celebrate Nigeria's local content on DSTV and
powered by Verve. Rasaki frequently tours many countries of the
world where he showcases his artistry in stage productions. For
over 30 years, his creative energy has enriched the arts in the
area of dance, performing, creating, administering and theatre
scholarship.
Presently, he teaches theatre, dance and choreography at the
University of Abuja. "Nigerian culture gives a lot of
importance in treating the guests with utmost care and warmth dance
most times. Nigerians enjoy dancing; soccer, Polo, cricket,
swimming and wrestling are popular among the affluent classes.
Nigerian culture is as old as 2000 years and what makes it stand
out is its diversity,” he said.
In e-mail chat with THISDAY, he said that dance is a fabric of
“our cultural expression and is also very educative. Dance is an
art form that generally requires the movement of the body, usually
rhythmic and to music, used as a form of expression, social
interaction or presented in a spiritual or performance setting.
“Dance is also used to describe methods of non-verbal
communication between humans or animal’s motion in inanimate
objects, and certain musical forms or genres. In sports,
gymnastics, figure skating and synchronised swimming are dance
disciplines while martial arts, karate are often compared to
dances.
“Again, I believe Nigerians learnt a lot from “Let's
dance”, our own television stations in Nigeria are doing nothing to
promote our culture through dance. People are coming from other
places to tap from the benefits presented by our population. MNet
understands this, and has chosen to invest in developing local
content for the DStv bouquet.
“Stations like AIT have some of this infrastructure. What I am
emphasising is the will to do it. They concentrate on other things.
Is this not the same thing we say about Globacom and the rest of
the telecom companies? Have you ever seen Globacom sponsoring a
dance contest or a theatre work? No, they are all concentrating on
sports without assisting the cultural industry to grow.