Adeyemi’s Art Odyssey
He wanted to become a medical doctor. His father treasured that
profession and wished he became one. But fate had something
different in store for him and today, he is happy he settled for a
career that holds a lot of passion for him. Meet Kunle Adeyemi, art
scholar and authority in printmaking and painting. Adeyemi’s love
for the arts is consuming. No wonder, he is widely celebrated for
his immense contribution to the growth of the industry and after 25
years of professional practice, the highly revered artist is not
ready to relent but rather intensify efforts at moving the industry
forward.
Fifty years is always considered a landmark that often called
for revelry. Adeyemi chose a different kind of celebration –
holding an exhibition to showcase his creative works from his body
of works over the years.
For him, commemorating his birthday with an exhibition is a
milestone and something to thank God about. “As an art scholar,
fifty years of existence, which this exhibition is commemorating,
is a milestone, particularly when one is on the verge of the second
half of a life’s game judging by the biblical time of three scores
and ten.”
The solo exhibition which opens today at the Ikoyi-based
Quintessence gallery will no doubt, unleash the creative ingenuity
in Adeyemi’s works shaped by his thoughts and cultural milieu.
With over 13 solo exhibitions and over 30 group exhibitions
within and outside the country, this exhibition highlights the
artist’s affinity with nature and documents events as they
unfolds.
His recent workshop and exhibition in Sweden has also influenced
his style positively and thus making his works new and distinctive.
His works includes deep etching, serigraphy, with influences from
his Yoruba tradition.
At the opening of the exhibition today, Adeyemi will present
over 35 works which include Ancestral Mask, Wheel of Fortune,
Bountiful Harvest, Praise God, Fragment of Tradition, and the
Village Square amongst others. Mask of Honour represents the fact
that masks are the windows through which the world sees Africa. The