Professor of Industrial Design and Visual Arts said of Adeyemi.
Indeed, Adeyemi has since the beginning of his career
synthesized painting and printmaking. He is one artist that
believes in style identification and the fact that mono-style can
actually be disadvantageous. Not only that, the talented artist and
lecturer at the Yaba College of Technology, admires and cherish
variety.
Adeyemi is dynamic in his usage of materials and his techniques
and compositional arrangement are balanced. Titled Dispatches from
My Art, the exhibition, which is Adeyemi’s third solo exhibition in
Quintessence gallery will no doubt give the gallery some refreshing
ambience. The event will also be used to launch his book tilted,
New Wine.
His journey into the creative world began many years ago and
since then he has been able to blend the Yaba style with
traditional arts of Benin and Yoruba perfectly well.
Describing his works as a revelation of cultural practices, Tola
Wewe, Ondo State commissioner of culture and tourism said, “his
works tell stories of past and present generations. Adeyemi
narrates history through creative designs and his intelligent use
of motifs aptly describes the maturity he has gained overtime.”
No doubt, Adeyemi has contributed immensely to the growth of art
in Nigeria. He has not only been involved in the training of
students through various workshops, he also recorded giant strides
during his tenure as chairman of the Society of Nigeria Artists,
Lagos State.
At 50, the artist says there is so much yet to be done. “Some
dreams are unfulfilled but I thank God for how far he has taken me
because there is so much ahead.”
The art scholar believes that art has given so much to the
country and that the government has not reciprocated this in the
art industry.
He therefore urged the government to look inwards and create a
conducive atmosphere for the arts to thrive. “Arts is supposed to
be registered in all parts in the country,” he said urging the
government to be serious with the National Endowment Fund for the