Badagry remembers slave route
Today, slavery becomes a topic for areas affected with
one of history’s inhumanity. Badagry, one of the slave ports that
dot the West African coast plans big. Joe Agbro Jr. reports
Every August 23rd, for the past ten years, the horrors of
slavery has been replayed in what many consider as one of the
hideous sins of man’s humanity to man. And in what has become a
ritual, the people of Badagry, Lagos are set to mark the turbulent,
disruptive, and crisis-ladened times of the slave trade, which
history records dislocated not less than 15 million Africans from
their ancestral homes.
This year’s celebration, for the people of Badagry is in honour
of the pop legend, Michael Joseph Jackson who passed on in July.
Slave trade was finally abolished in Badagry on 18th March 1852,
but the scars are still there. The Gberefun point of no return is
an example, and the slave market, and the slave route
It was on the night of August 22nd 1791 through the morning of
the next day on the Island of Santo Domingo that an uprising marked
the beginning of the abolition of the transatlantic slave trade.
The significance of the date is one that is not lost on the black
race which has suffered most from slavery. And it was for this that
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation (UNESCO) declared August 23rd every year as
International Day For The
Rememberance Of The Slave Trade And Its Abolition.
Following a sequence of events, the Egun
people, the dominant tribe of Badagry have claimed Michael Jackson
as one of their sons who was sold into slavery through the
‘point-of-no-return’. But, when asked
how it was confirmed that Jackson indeed originated from Badagry,
the Senior Special Adviser on Tourism to the Chairman, Badagry
Local Government, Prince Yomi Ajose put western science to the
background, and relied on African science.
In October, 1996, Ajose visited Michigan, USA for an African
World Expo. There, he met Mayor Gary Loster and was introduced to