very few women are screened for cervical cancer, in fact, it is
estimated that only 10% of female physicians in Nigeria have ever
had a Pap smear themselves. In another study conducted in a
tertiary institution in Nigeria, seventy-one percent were aware of
cervical cancer, while only 33 percent were aware of
Papanicolaou's smear. It is estimated that without a
significant improvement in prevention, there will be a million new
cases of HPV by the year 2049.
Predisposing factors to HPV infection include sexual activity,
prior Sexually Transmitted Infections, early sexual debut,
prolonged use of birth control pills, women who smoke, and having
same sex or multiple sexual partners. Genital HPV infection is
extremely common and most often causes no symptoms. HPV is
transmitted through sexual intercourse, however transmission can
occur without penetrative sex, as HPV is transmitted through
skin-to-skin contact in the genital area. Therefore, every sexually
active woman is at risk. 50-80% of women will acquire an HPV
infection in their lifetime and up to 50% of those infections will
be oncogenic HPV type. Progressions from HPV infection to Cervical
Cancer is slow and usually take years. Hence, the infection is
usually more prevalent among women from ages 35-50.
Cervical cancer is preventable, and treatable if detected early.
Vaccination with HPV vaccine is credited with reducing both the
incidence and death rate from cervical cancer. Gardasil, a
prophylactic quadrivalent vaccine manufactured by Merck&
Co. and licensed in many countries is designed to protect
against HPV 16 and 18 and also protects against low-risk genotypes
6 and 11. Administration of three (3) doses at intervals of 2
months between doses 1 and 2; 6 months between doses 1 and 3 in
females and males between ages 9–15 years with Merck’s HPV vaccine
will reduce the incidence of low-grade and high-grade lesions,
infection with vaccine HPV types, long-term duration of protection
and robust anti-HPV responses when administered with other common
vaccines. Thereby, reducing the physical, emotional, and financial
burden of management of HPV disease. GSK’s Cervarix is a bivalent
vaccine with only HPV 16 and 18.