Things that can go wrong with the male reproductive
system
Boys may sometimes experience reproductive system problems,
including:
Disorders of the Scrotum, Testicles, or
Epididymis
Conditions affecting the scrotal contents may involve the
testicles, epididymis, or the scrotum itself.
Testicular trauma.
Even a mild injury to the testicles can cause severe pain,
bruising, or swelling. Most testicular injuries occur when the
testicles are struck, hit, kicked, or crushed, usually during
sports or due to other trauma. Testicular torsion, when one of the
testicles twists around, cutting off its blood supply, is also a
problem that some teen males experience, although it’s not common.
Surgery is needed to untwist the cord and save the testicle.
Varicocele.
This is a varicose vein (an abnormally swollen vein) in the
network of veins that run from the testicles. Varicoceles commonly
develop while a boy is going through puberty. A varicocele is
usually not harmful, although it can damage the testicle or
decrease sperm production. Take your son to see his doctor if he is
concerned about changes in his testicles.
Testicular cancer.
This is one of the most common cancers in men younger than 40.
It occurs when cells in the testicle divide abnormally and form a
tumor. Testicular cancer can spread to other parts of the body, but
if it’s detected early, the cure rate is excellent. Teen boys
should be encouraged to learn to perform testicular
self-examinations.
Epididymitis
is inflammation of the epididymis, the coiled tubes that connect
the testes with the vas deferens. It is usually caused by an
infection, such as the sexually transmitted disease chlamydia, and
results in pain and swelling next to one of the testicles.
Hydrocele.
A hydrocele occurs when fluid collects in the membranes
surrounding the testes. Hydroceles may cause swelling in the
scrotum around the testicle but are generally painless. In some
cases, surgery may be needed to correct the condition.
Inguinal
hernia
. When a portion of the
intestines pushes through an abnormal opening or weakening of the
abdominal wall and into the groin or scrotum, it is known as an