Nigerians lament rising incidences of child sexual
abuse
Concerned Nigerians at a 2 -day Consultative meeting of Media
Concern Initiative for Women and Children (MEDIACON) in Lagos have
raised alarm over the rising increase in child sexual abuse in the
country, lamenting that most of the offenders go unpunished due to
inadequate time frame for prosecution.
Speaking to Good Health Weekly, the Director from the Office of
the Public Defenders (OPD), Lagos State, Mrs. Omotola Rotimi
said the law did not provide adequate time to prosecute
offenders.
According to Rotimi, the law only provided two months within
which an offender should be prosecuted, this she said has made it
more difficult for offenders to be brought to book. Omotola in her
paper entitled, “What does the law say?” disclosed
that only five offenders have been prosecuted out of hundreds of
cases lying before the office due to so many constraints, ranging
from timing and lack of forensic evidence, inability of parents to
allow their wards to testify and social stigma.
"
Her words, “There is a loophole on the defilement. For instance,
you must prosecute within two months the offence is committed. This
has made it impossible to prosecute over 100s of cases standing
before the office. In the last few years we have only been able to
prosecute five cases and these girls are all under 10 years.”
Stating that Lagos state has declared zero tolerance to sexual
and child abuse, she identified some of the constraints to include;
Social stigma, lack of DNA facilities in the country amongst
others.
She advocated for the elongation of the two months period to
five years in Nigeria in order to effectively pin the offenders
down and bring them to book.
Also speaking, Executive Director of MEDIACON, Princess Olufemi
Kayode who identified communication and massive awareness as a
major tool in eliminating child and sexual abuse explained that the
meeting was specifically to sensitize market men and women on the
need to be more informed and educate their children as well as
prevent such ugly situations around their young ones.