Maternal death:Caging the terror of Nigerian
women
It took the death of some soldiers during an encounter
with Niger Delta militants to provoke the military authorities into
declaring an all out offensive to flush out and punish the killers.
Why? Because a life in service of the nation is considered precious
enough to be treasured. But everyday several Nigerian women go into
the battle of giving birth to children and not many come out of it
alive to tell the happy story. In fact, statistics from relevant
sources have it that maternal mortality in Nigeria is not only
alarmingly high but one of the highest in the world. It is even
more disturbing because government in spite of its posturing in
addressing the problem has only succeeded so far in paying lip
service to it. Sola Ogundipe and Chioma Obinna report.
A COMMON cliche in Nigeria in recent times is that the quickest
way for a woman to “find death” is simply to become pregnant.
“About every 10 minutes, a Nigerian woman dies as a result of
complications of pregnancy or childbirth and hundreds of thousands
more are disabled in birth related accidents every year.”
This daunting statement was the gloomy verdict on the nation as
the world marked the 2009 Safe Motherhood Day, May 26. By and
large, this is the lamentable situation in Nigeria today.
It is indisputable that women in the country are dying before,
during or after childbirth. The lamentation of unnecessary loss of
lives has been on for so long it is beginning to sound like a
broken record.
Somewhere, it is either lamentation of one woman dying of a
pregnancy-related complication or illness, or a tale of woe of
another woman surviving the onslaught of a pregnancy-related
complication, only to be permanently condemned to a life of strife.
The bottom line is that all over the land there is lamentation
about the wastage of human life in the guise of maternal
mortality.
From all indications, high maternal mortality and morbidity
rates in Nigeria have remained a pattern and the rates have
remained particularly worrisome.