Whatever Happened to Traditional Family
Structure!
The need to restore the African traditional family
structure to allow it regain its traditional status and power of
effecting positive change in the society was part of discussion at
a recent family congress held in Abuja, writes
Mary
Ekah
“The task of raising a child properly was a sacred one because
of its far reaching consequences for the security and survival of
the soul of the community. Fathers, mothers, grandparents, older
siblings, in-laws and relatives had a collective responsibility to
raise the young and each saw this as an obligation to the family
and the larger community. To fail to raise a morally responsible
person was to have failed the community and brought disgrace on
one’s family and kindred …”
This was the submission of the National Co-coordinator, Marriage
and Family Life Committee of the Catholic Bishops Conference and
Director of the Lagos Resource Centre, Mrs. Bridget Itsueli
at the World Congress Families held in Abuja recently. This was
said in recognition of the contribution of the African traditional
family to the development of good citizens and establishment of the
community’s identity, its outlook, values and goals.
The traditional societies, Itsueli said, recognises the
political and social significance of the family, noting however
that the modern Nigeria society seems quite ignorant of this truth.
“It is truth that the larger community is always a sum total and a
reflection of its individual families. We cannot continue to ignore
the current lack of the moral values which is glaringly evident in
our leadership at all levels of the Nigerian society,” she said.
She noted that this was a reflection of what is pervasive at the
family level were there is serious moral disintegration, which need
to be addressed on a national agenda. “In a nation where the
majority of its families live in abject poverty and deprivation of
all sorts, where basic amenities like education and health are
handled with non-chalance
and a gross lack of probity, parents and families in such a nation
cannot but be demoralised, incapacitated and weak,” Itsueli
said.