According to the World Health Organisation (WHO) and UNICEF, a
woman in Nigeria has a 1-in-18 risk of dying in childbirth or from
pregnancy-related causes during her lifetime, which is higher than
the overall 1-in-22 risk for women throughout sub-Saharan
Africa.
The risks of maternal death are even greater for Nigerian women,
in the northern region of the country, rural women, and low income
women without formal education. Essentially, from Lagos to
Maiduguri, from Calabar to Sokoto, the story is the same. High
maternal mortality in Nigeria is one problem that has simply
refused to go away.
The statistics are indeed frightening and the numerous numbers
of death are numbing. It is on record that every year an estimated
59,000 Nigerian women die due to pregnancy-related complications,
second only to India in the world ranking of countries with high
maternal mortality deaths. There is no running away from the fact
that Nigeria has an epidemic of maternal mortality.
This distressing and disturbing fact is extrapolated from
findings which show that the country has one of the highest
maternal mortality rates in the world contributing an approximate
10 per cent of the total world estimate of maternal deaths.
For every woman that dies, 15 – 20 other women suffer short or
long-term disabilities including obstetric fistulae, ruptured
uterus and paralysis and complications such as Vesico Vaginal
Fistulae (VVF).
Maternal death, according to the World Health Organisation is
the “death of a woman while pregnant or within 42 days of
termination of pregnancy, irrespective of the duration and site of
the pregnancy, from any cause related to or aggravated by the
pregnancy or its management, but not from accidental or incidental
causes.”
Pregnancy-related death is “death of a woman while pregnant or
within 42 days of termination of pregnancy, irrespective of the
cause of death”.
The majority of these maternal deaths, are not just preventable,
but outright unnecessary. A report from Women Advocates Research
andDocumentation
Centre (WARDC) and the Center for Reproductive Rights (CRR) which
focuses specifically on the Nigerian government’s responsibility