for the dire state of maternal health in the country puts the issue
in perspective.
Entitled “Broken Promise:. Human Rights, Accountability
& Maternal Deaths in Nigeria”, the
report provides an analysis of some of the key factors that
contribute to Nigeria’s high maternal mortality rate and their
human rights and legal implications.
It looks at failures in government leadership, including issues
involving health-care financing and corruption, and discusses how
the nation’s lack of contraceptive access and funding contributes
to its high maternal death rate amongst others.
While the Nigerian government has repeatedly identified maternal
mortality and morbidity as a pressing problem and developed laws
and policies in response, the report notes that “these actions have
not translated into a significant improvement in maternal health
throughout the country.
A number of factors inhibit the provision and availability of
maternal health care in the country, including: the inadequacy or
lack of implementation of laws and policies, the prevalence of
systemic corruption, weak infrastructure, ineffective health
services, and the lack of access to skilled health-care providers
worsened by separation of responsibilities for the provision of
health care among the country’s three tiers of government.
But the absence of a constitutional or other legal prescription
of health-care responsibilities is largely seen as the cause of a
dysfunctional health-care system in which all three tiers of
government have failed to prioritise their health-care duties,
having deleterious effects for women seeking maternal care. Issues
around resource allocation for health care also abound.
According to the WARDC report, “most of these deaths can be
prevented Preventable
maternal death and disability are increasingly recognized as
pressing human rights issues, encompassing questions of resource
allocation and political commitment, for which governments must be
held accountable.”
The situation in Nigeria illustrates the importance of
government accountability in effectively reducing maternal death,
the report stressed.
But the pattern may be set to change, given the commitment of
the Federal Health Ministry. Maternal survival was prominent on the
primary agenda of the Nigerian delegation to the 62nd World Health
Assembly held in Geneva Switzerland May 18-22, 2009.