The nation was engaged in series of round table discussions with
the best experts in the business of saving women’s lives. According
to the Health Minister, Prof Babatunde Osotimehin, “We took on the
forum to make a
differencefor our women. We described the things we are
doing including the midwifery schemes, the anti-shock garment that
includes blood transfusion services and the training and
re-equipping of primary healthcare centers and the pulling of more
resources as well as increasing physical access.”
Also, to underscore the critical role played by healthcare
professionals in the country in ensuring safe motherhood,
Osotimehin has consistently advocated for an intensified skilled
birth attendance at delivery point.
He stresses that in order to for the process to take place, the
attendant must have necessary skills and an enabling environment at
various levels of health care system including a supportive policy
and regulatory framework, adequate supplies, equipment,
infrastructure, efficient system communication and referral.
While blaming factors such as limited coverage of practices like
efficient family planning/birth spacing services, poor Newborn
Care/postnatal care, hemorrhage, eclampsia, obstructed labour,
infection, unsafe abortion, malaria/anaemia etc., the
Minister notes: “the high maternal, newborn and child health
indices of the country are unacceptable”, he points to the Federal
government’s move to embark on the Integrated Maternal, Newborn and
Child Health (IMNCH) Strategy which is being rolled out to States
of the Federation.
In the view of Dr. Suomi Sakai, UNICEF Representative in
Nigeria: “We know how to reduce maternal mortality and
illness; it can be done. Basic measures—such as preventing and
treating malaria, providing mothers-to-be with adequate nutrition
and ante-natal care, training birth attendants, and ensuring that
health centers can offer emergency obstetrical care—save the lives
of women and their children.”
With the theme “Skilled Birth Delivery, A must for Every Mother”
a call for collective effort of all stakeholders to achieve the
strategic plan that would facilitate the ultimate reduction of
maternal and newborn morbidity and mortality appears firmly set in
motion.
But while government at the top could be lauded for its efforts