to reduce the rate of maternal mortality here, which is nonetheless
still one of the highest in the world, the problem remains. The
story of maternal mortality in Nigeria is still a paradox.
Everyone knows that Nigerians know how to reduce maternal
mortality and illness; everyone knows it can be done through basic
measures—such as preventing and treating malaria, providing
mothers-to-be with adequate nutrition and ante-natal care, training
birth attendants, and ensuring that health centers can offer
emergency obstetrical care.
Nigeria can save the lives of its women and their babies, but it
is saddening to note that enough is still not being done to stem
the tide of death. More is yet to be done to improve the well being
of women. In the face of a struggling healthcare system and
services at all levels of government, much remains to be desired.
If only Nigerian women could stop dying to give life.
Connecting maternal health with other MDGs
THE Millenuim Development Goal on Maternal Health has as target
reduction of maternal mortality ratio by three quarter by 2015.
In the developing world, the risk of death from complications
relating to pregnancy and childbirth over the course of a woman’s
lifetime is one in 76, compared with one in 8,000 in the
industrialised world.
Most maternal deaths are avoidable.
A key to avoiding them is better health care – particularly
during pregnancy, delivery and in the post-partum period.
Interventions that improve maternal health include: Antenatal care,
provider-initiated HIV testing and counseling, skilled attendance
at birth, emergency obstetric care, post-partum care and family
planning in keeping with national policies. When offered across a
continuum of care that integrates home, community, outreach and
facility-based services, these interventions can have multiple
benefits for mothers, children and the communities in which they
live.
There have been some promising areas of improvement in maternal
health interventions in recent years.
Coverage of antenatal care throughout the developing world has
increased by 15 percentage points in the past decade, with 75
percent of expectant mothers now receiving some antenatal care. At