Group canvases behaviour change at the grassroots
Youths at every point in time should be exposed to development
programmes which will prepare them to meet the challenges of
adolescence and adulthood through a structured, progressive series
of activities and experience which help them obtain social,
emotional, ethical, physical and cognitive competencies. Such
programmes are also knowledge centred as it builds a range of life
skills, activities to show that youth learning is a reason to be
involved, whether in sports, clubs, community service and provide
opportunities to connect them to a wide array of adult and peer
mentors.
The people of Isele Community, Ikorodu, in Lagos State, young
and old were opportuned to be empowered with such developmental
programmes for one year. At the end, a final Open Community Meeting
was held recently at the community.
The programme was titled ‘Final Open
Community’ meeting in Isele Community
," otherwise known as CHIPAC
project.
Speaking about the highlights of the one year project, the
Executive Director Project, HFPD, Mr Henry Adenigba said the
training was tagged Peer Education Plus Project for five target
groups namely. Male Out of School Youth (MOSY), Female Out of
School Youth (FOSY); Transport Workers (TW’s), Female Sex Workers
(FSW) and Uniformed Service Men (USM).
The project according to him centred on behavioural change on
health issues, vocational skills, youth development project,
capacity building project, among others. The programme took off in
the Community after having got approval from the Community
Development Associations CDAs.
The experience sharing session by each target groups afforded
participants opportunity to explain what they’ve learnt in last one
year.
"There are some information which I now know about HIV and
AIDS, I’m now better informed," said a member of MOSY
group.
"I now know the effects of drug /alcohol abuse and how one
can live positively if a person is positive," said a member of
FOSY group. "As youth, abstinence is the
key" he said.
A Transport Worker in his own contribution enjoined his fellow
participants to remain faithful to their partner. "If you