Taming the Menace of Child Abuse
Recently, the Akwa Ibom State was on the world map over cases of
child abuse as some innocent children were labeled witches, abused
and thrown out into the streets. As this army of children grew, the
state government stepped in to stem the problem by legislating
against child abuse, while the governor has gone further to
rehabilitate the children, attracting diverse commendation, writes
MARY
EKAH
Governor Godswill Akpabio's recent surprise visit to the
abandoned children branded witches/wizards in Eket, Akwa Ibom
State, has attracted international acclaim, with many Akwa Ibom
indigenes in Diaspora describing him as a sensitive and caring
leader who has impacted creditably on the lives of the citizenry.
Even the governor's worst critics rose in his praises on some
on-line interactive hosted by yahoo groups. Akpabio had, last week,
visited the Child Rights and Rehabilitation Network (CRARN) where
over 200 children rejected by their parents and wards are catered
for by Mr. Samuel Itauma and his wife.
During the visit, which took even the Itaumas by surprise,
Akpabio announced a N10 million donation; and the setting up of a
revolving scholarship scheme that would take care of the tertiary
education of the children even after he has left office. He also
set up a committee to reconcile some of the children with their
parents and guardians and assured them of protection from further
abuse and harassment.
“Finally, this matter (child stigmatisation) needs continuing
education, enlightenment and pressure. A tripod of pressure points
from the state, the UK and US should continue in order to change
mind-sets. The new AG should see this matter beyond the usual and
comfortable legal framework and should not hold back in using state
legal powers to create impact on this matter. The AG should
understand that an effective government supports and works well
with private actors and service providers. What is in the best
interest of those children should define all our actions”, he
added.
The issue of child witchcraft has attracted a great deal of
media attention since the broadcast of the documentary,