Microsoft releases free anti-virus software
As Users and Security Experts Give it a pass mark
Competitors criticise the product
Microsoft Corporation has released an antivirus software named
Microsoft Security Essentials. The software, which was released
last week been downloaded by numerous windows users across the
globe.
The product, according to Microsoft, is free and can be
downloaded by anyone using Security Essentials’ website. Versions
are available for Windows XP, Vista, and 7. Also, no registration
is required and the software can be installed on any number of PCs
without restrictions.
Security Essentials which was launched last Tuesday, is basic
anti-virus and anti-spyware software that Microsoft touts as
suitable for users who can’t, or won’t, pay for security.
Microsoft Security Essentials provides real-time protection that
uses behaviour monitoring and reputation services to help identify
the malicious software as soon as it emerges in the ecosystem and
then uses the Dynamic Signature Service to make the newest
definitions available virtually real-time, without having to wait
for the next signature download.
Microsoft Security Essentials as learnt by PC User to
User takes over from Windows Live OneCare, a commercial
offering that was phased out in June and it focuses on something
that is much broader in its offering.
Although Security Essentials is free, it will not be installed
with Windows or provided as an automatic update.
Microsoft Security Essentials runs quietly and efficiently in
the background so that you are free to use your Windows-based PC as
desired, without interruptions or long computer wait times.
Since the release of the software, several security testing
firms have put up tests, to ascertain the potency of the software.
One of such was av-test.org.
To check static known malware, AV-Test pitted Security
Essentials against the most recent WildList, a sampling of 3,732
viruses and other threats. Microsoft’s product successfully
detected and blocked all of the samples in both manual and active
scanning.
Microsoft will block users running counterfeit copies of Windows
from installing the free Security Essentials antivirus software.
All efforts, according to, Microsoft would be put in place to check
the activities of the pirates.