Firm launches anti-piracy disks
A new technology to prevent music and video piracy has been 
    launched.
It enables musicians and video producers to choose customised 
    and piracy-protected Compact Disks (CDs) or Digital Video Disks 
    (DVDs) for their works.
The protected disks are equipped with a different encryption 
    code applied after authoring, limiting digital file transfer.
The technology uses the International Recording Media 
    Association’s Anti-Piracy Compliance Programme on all replicated 
    optical discs and digital contents.
Presenting samples of protected disks in Lagos, the Manager, 
    Operations and Technology, Yemi’s Media Ltd, Mr Tolu Osaigbovo, 
    said artistes and producers can also choose the colour of CDs or 
    DVDs they want, to differentiate them.
He added that the company, which is in partnership with Sony, 
    also has a Dual Disk made up of a CD on one side and a DVD on the 
    other, for any artiste who may 
    want a deluxe edition of his album.
This makes it possible to create audio, video and computer 
    content on a single two-sided disc, he said, adding that the 
    company duplicates the master copy using the protected CDs or 
    DVDs.
"New and different code is applied to every title and 
    re-launch. This high level of protection makes a generic crack 
    impossible," Osaigbovo said.
He added: "All protected DVD-Videos can be played on any 
    DVD-Video or DVD-ROM device. Advanced technological methods ensure 
    that these DVDs achieve Sony’s requirements for high level of 
    quality and performance.
"It effectively deals with copying from DVD to DVD, DVD to 
    hard drive and distribution on the internet."
Apart from record stores which it plans to open for distribution 
    of works, the company also offers exclusive packaging using 
    Steelbook Case, which consists of a metal exterior and inner core 
    of plastic.
The Brand and Marketing Manager, Mr Soji Oseni, said a finished 
    copy of the CD costs about N185, while the deluxe edition will sell 
    for about N300 per unit.
The company says in intends to partner with agencies and 
    organisations involved in the war against piracy.
