HTC magic, iPhone Killer? Not yet
Ever since Apple Inc. reinvented the smartphone with the
release of the iPhone, phone manufacturers have responded with
various attempts at matching the functionality, and the hype;
Samsung with the Omnia, LG with prada, and even RIM with the
Blackberry Storm. And now, from HTC, manufacturers of the “HTC
touch HD pro” smart phone comes this beauty in white it calls
MAGIC.
The introduction of the HTC Magic is the result of a successful
relationship between Vodafone and HTC, and Vodafone’s joining, late
last year, of the Open Handset Alliance.
For starters HTC Magic weights a reasonable 118g against the
133g of the iPhone. In terms of display the capacitive touch screen
16m colours with size 32x480 pixels 3.2 inches, puts it a
few steps behind the iPhone.
With memory, the HTC magic possesses the usual unlimited entries
in its phone book, a card slot supporting transflash micro SD,
which should not be present on a phone like this. You'd wonder
what the manufactures were thinking? Okay and here’s what they
thought was best, a 192 MB RAM, 512MB ROM (What?!!) and a qualcomm
msm 7201A 528 mhz processor running @ 10,236
8kb per second.
HTC Magic comes with the standard specs in connectivity, i.e., GSM 850 /900/1800/1900 on a 2G network and HSDPA
900/2100 on a 3G network, and of course, WiFi (802.11b/g).
Bluetooth on this phone is for headset support only. Na
Wa O! GPS is included (like that shouldn't be a
standard feature by now).
The operating system makes up for all the short comings the HTC
Magic might have; the latest from the stables of Google; the
Android, an operating system which is ready to give other mobile
phone operating systems such as symbian and even the Mac OSX on the
iPhone a good run.
The Iphone came with a 2.0 mega pixel camera with no video or secondary camera
capabilines... the HTC Magic pictures comes with a 3.2 mega
pixel camera with autofocus, with video recording capabilities and
secondary camera. Magic is powered by a battery of talktime 7hours