New Kia Cerato: Innovation beyond change
With its generous wheelbase equates to a spacious
interior, the flat floor design at the rear that aids passengers
seating at the centre feel comfortable; well-designed and equipped
interior to its aesthetically-beautiful exterior, everything; every
part of the new Kia Cerato talks about a vehicle designed for, with
and around the driver. Writes TAJUDEEN ADEBANJO
For some time now, it has been evident to the observant person
who regularly navigates the ever-busy streets of Lagos that Kia
motors has indeed become a factor in the Nigerian and at large West
African automobile circle. And with its newest incarnation
; the new-improved Cerato, it has
raised the bar several notches higher.
This car, marketed with a campaign tagged ‘Unbeatable value for money’; and that is no idle
comment. From its spacious cabin, well-sorted looks, well-designed
and equipped interior to its aesthetically-beautiful exterior,
everything; every part of the car talks about a vehicle designed
for, with and around the driver.
Obviously the new car is nothing short of a complete
rejuvenation in terms of design. For example, it is interesting to
see how the front and rear headlamps are detailed yet still a
coherent part of the whole design, or how the shoulders are now
more pronounced without being too heavy.
First of all, the new Cerato is a 4-door sedan, available in
1.6 litre engine with options available for both the manual
and automatic transmissions.
With a wheelbase of 2650mm, the Cerato trumps more expensive
competitors. Its generous wheelbase equates to a spacious interior.
Rear passengers have ample leg and headroom. In addition, the flat
floor design at the rear means passengers seated at the centre will
feel comfortable with the additional leg space.
Up front, the modern and contemporary dashboard design
compliments the handsome exterior. The materials used might not
feel like the highest quality but Kia has taken the trouble to
offer a classy interior ambience in the Cerato nonetheless thanks
to the use of red illumination and well-thought out switchgear.
The driving position is extremely adjustable thanks to height