Revisiting forest of antennas — Nigeria Your Skyline! -
Part (11)
“Optic Fiber Vs Wireless” Chris Uwaje _ with contribution from
Roland Alden.“ However, in the developing economies where network
construction is viewed in context as an investment in the economy
and driver of economic growth, this view is 180′ out of synch.
Network construction in these environments should be optimized
to enable the maximum amount of opportunity along and adjacent the
network route. For example, in the “cost” view model of network
construction the need for reliable electricity at a regeneration
point is viewed as a negative input that must be compensated for by
either 1) costly construction or by 2) fancy electronics that allow
the “powerless” region to be traversed without stopping.
In the “development model” the need to provide an oasis of
electricity and infrastructure along the network route is also an
opportunity to enable an economic environment that will create
network customers over the long term. Furthermore, this investment
in a “micro economy” lowers the cost of providing service to
possibly larger economies elsewhere on the network.
This view of network construction is not common in telecom but
is the norm for other networks, such as roads and waterworks.
In many large countries it is not at all uncommon to travel on a
long, nearly deserted highway only to find gas stations at
amazingly regular intervals which provide the fuel that makes the
highway into an economically useful resource. No one builds special
purpose vehicles equipped with gigantic fuel tanks that make such
gas stations unnecessary.
Typically a small economy may grow up around such a gas station;
at a minimum one large enough to sustain the gas station itself but
typically one which might further leverage the investment such as
mechanized farms, irrigation pumps, a small airport and perhaps a
regional healthcare facility. The value of the gas station to the
adjacent economies that it nourishes can easily be doubled simply
by locating it at the intersection of two highways instead of
alongside only one.