So for people in Africa, the ITU new standard would be a boost
as it promises to deliver many times the throughput of existing
wireless and wired technologies.
Approval of the new standard will allow manufacturers of
networked home devices – set-top boxes, residential gateways,
computers, audio systems, DVD players, household appliances and any
other device that might be connected to a network – to confidently
move forward with their R&D programmes and rapidly bring
products to market. Experts predict that the first chipsets
employing G.hn will be available in early 2010.
According to the Director of ITU’s Telecommunication
Standardization Bureau, Mr Malcolm Johnson, “G.hn is a
technology that gives new use to the cabling most people already
have in their homes. The remarkable array of applications that it
will enable includes energy efficient smart appliances, home
automation and telemedicine devices. The sheer weight of industry
support behind this innovation is testament to the extraordinary
potential of this standard to transform home
networking.”
The physical layer and architecture portion of the standard were
approved by ITU-T Study Group 15 on October 9. The data link layer
of the new standard is expected to garner final approval at the
group’s next meeting in May 2010.
The Home Grid Forum, a group set up to promote G.hn, is
developing a certification programme together with the Broadband
Forum that will aid semiconductor and systems manufacturers in
building and bringing standards-compliant products to market, with
products that fully conform to the G.hn standard bearing the
HomeGrid-certified logo.
Also agreed at the recent ITU-T Study Group 15 meeting was a new
standard that focuses on coexistence between G.hn-based
products and those using other technologies. Known as G.9972, the standard describes the process by which G.hn
devices will work with power line devices that use technologies
such as IEEE P1901. In addition, experts say that they will develop
extensions to G.hn to support SmartGrid applications.