Nokia unveils mobile computer
IN response to customers continued yearning for improved and
quality products, world leading manufacturer of mobile phone, Nokia
last week unveiled a mobile computer, Nokia N97 mini in Lagos.
The N97 Mini, which is expected to hit Nigerian market next
month is targeted at users who want something more pocket-friendly
when they’re on the go, and comes with stainless steel cues and
sleek white casing.
It also comes in colourful device and is cheap and affordable
for end users.Unveiling the product
last week in Lagos, head of Nokia research centre, Henry Tirri said
“ customers feedback made us to come with Nokia N97 mini. We have
always been responsive to our customers’ demand.”
He described the mobile phone as a software upgrade and a
convergence of everything Nokia is doing with technology, capable
of serving the dual purpose of mobile phone and laptop everywhere
the user may be, adding that the computing power and
accessaries of the phones
, makes it unique among other
phone with similar features.
“With about 32 Gigabytes and increased memory, what we are
trying to do with N97 mini is to make it more portable and
convenience to the user. And the peculiarity of the product is
that, you can customize the screen and connect to LCD screen and
Laser Jet printer with ease.
The N97 Mini has a fully customizable home screen, a tilting
3.2″ wide-screen touch display, symbian operating system,
full Qwerty keyboard and 8Gigabyte,
or 24 Gigabyte expandable, memory.
With the new N97 mini, users will be able to browse the web
quickly and effortlessly through a superfast 3G or Wi-Fi
connection. In addition, users can seamlessly connect with their
friends and favorite online services and as well receive live feeds
from their favorite social networking sites and news services.
The N97 mini in white features also come with a 5-megapixel
camera with Carl Zeiss Optics and dual LED flash, DVD-quality video
recording, music player and email capabilities. The upgraded
browser offers lifecasting. An application to gain direct access to