Oando introduces e-payment to marketing
Nigeria’s leading oil marketing firm - Oando Marketing Limited
(OML), a subsidiary of Oando PLC has announced plans to introduce a
new electronic payment solution called ‘PAYDirect’ which will come into operation on
October 1, 2009.
The electronic payment service, the company said, will be
powered by InterSwitch to enhance service to customers across its
over 500 retail service stations nationwide.
The company in a statement issued by its Head, Corporate
Communications Meka Olowola said: "This initiative was
conceptualised from the need to improve product supply chain
management and boost the efficiency of the company’s retail
outlets, thereby guaranteeing petroleum products availability
across all Oando service stations nationwide.
"PAYDirect is an online real time service targeted mainly
at OML’s cash paying dealers nationwide. Once introduced, PAYDirect
will drastically reduce the time it takes to confirm payment for
products from about 24 hours to a few minutes via instant
notification of all payments into participating banks allowing for
immediate shipping of products from any of OML’s over 20 fuel and
lubricant storage locations direct to the paying customer’s site.
Introduction of the "PAYDirect" solution further
reinforces OML’s status as the most operationally efficient player
in the downstream sector, having already successfully implemented
the Oracle E-business Suite in 2007 as its core operating platform.
This solution will provide the dealers of Oando Marketing the
following benefits;
faster processing and release of products to dealers as a result
of immediate tracking of payments, online real-time accounts status
and tracking of payments made anywhere across the country,
availability of historical reports of transactions for easier
reconciliation and elimination of bank confirmation for payments
made to any of OML’s accounts.
Commenting on the initiative, the Chief Operating Officer, OML
Mr. Ayo Ajose-Adeogun, said: "As a customer-focused
organization, we continually reinvent our processes to ensure
excellent service delivery to stakeholders. The PAYDirect solution
offers OML a 24-hour reduction in the typical order-to-delivery
cycle for all our products regardless of the delivery point.
"The immediate impact of this is the quick turnaround of