The future is …. Convergence
In 2006 when the VoIP Africa Forum held in Lagos to discuss a
very dicey theme in the industry, everyone who should know agreed
that the industry is in transition and that the future of the
industry will be VoIP (Voice over Internet Protocol). The regulator
in the person of Engineer Ernest Ndukwe did not mince words. VoIP
would become the industry’s vista for doing the seemingly
impossible. It would challenge the old order of doing things, make
giants of minnows and make dinosaurs of incumbents who refused to
adapt to change.
But even then, the most conservative and less optimistic in the
industry believed VoIP was only an abbreviation of something more
than it. VoIP was merely signifying an unfolding reality that would
be much more revolutionary than the transmission of voice packets
over soft switches. The industry saw EoIP coming – Everything over
IP. It is here and perforce, the age of convergence.
Enter convergence. And everything collapses into one pipe
carrying content of voice, video, data, and everything conceivable
to bring timeless communication to the marriage of media and
content. As long there is bandwidth and there is soft switch,
content will flow in high speed once unfathomed.
Virtually all the 21st century compliant networks have the
ability to provide a range of services over a single network:
consider voice, video, and Internet data all coming down your cable
television link; or all these services including
broadcast\television signals coming to your home through the
wireless telephone link of Multilinks or Starcomms.
Everything has changed. Well! Everything except several
incumbents in the old order that dominated the scene in the pre
liberalization era and the new private sector monster operators in
the pre VoIP age: The new incumbents that turned most of the PTTs
to dinosaurs by their massive rollout, buildout speed, high level
of innovativeness that ushered in new level of competitions. With
massive expenditure on traditional infrastructures, the stakes for
market dominance and dividends are higher; VoIP meant trouble and
the transition to convergence naturally inspires fear and
excitement.