Be an enthusiastic cheerleader. This is your second most
powerful tool. Talk to other practice leaders about what you
observed from sitting in on some practice group meeting.
That will both serve to support the view that this is important
to you and that they are likely to see you in attendance at their
meeting; as well as signal to any practice leaders who are not
meeting that your commitment to moving forward is genuine.
Shoot an e-mail to the specific leader and the members of the
group acknowledging some of the good action ideas that were
generated and how you are looking forward to hearing about the
progress that has been made at their next meeting. That will
provide the additional catalyst to drive team members to progress
those activities they volunteered to implement.
You may also develop a Practice Group Leaders Council.
Increasingly, firms have come to realize that one of the challenges
is to find the means by which to facilitate communications,
information and knowledge, among and between the departments,
practice groups, and industry teams that comprise firms.
Many firms have now initiated some form of practice leaders
council that meets for a couple of hours (at least quarterly) to
review and discuss what is going on within their various groups.
This council can serve as an excellent venue for reporting results
that can then be communicated across the firm.
At your meetings with these practice leaders, acknowledge small
success (especially any that you can quantify), encourage any
leaders who have been reluctant to take action, and spend some time
discussing issues that are germane to other practice groups (where
some course of action underway in one group may have implications
for other groups).
Schedule periodic progress reviews every six months, with all
practice leaders to discuss their progress, get specific feedback
on action plans, and offer suggestions to enhance performance. By
setting the date for this review meeting well in advance, this
action signals to leaders the importance attached to their being
able to report specific results.