some kind of unique knowledge. This doesn’t mean that you become an
expert on every product or service that you sell, but it does mean
that you have knowledge that is of value to the customer.
Step three: Align your thoughts and behaviours to reliably
generate trust
Who you are is only half of the equation. Your ability to build
customer relationships will also depend upon your thought processes
about yourself, about customers and about the process of selling.
Ideally you want all three of these aligned and congruent. Here’s
how.
Integrate the right mind-set
. If you want people around you to value having
a relationship with you, you must truly believe that relationship
building is important. You must also believe that you honestly have
something of value to offer.
Get curious about people. People are drawn
to those who show true interest in them. Curiosity about people is
thus a crucial element of relationship building. Having an abiding
fascination in others gives you the opportunity to learn new things
and make new connections.
Be reliable in your actions. A customer’s
ability to trust you, and thus be willing to have a relationship
with you, is dependent upon showing the customer that your
behaviour is consistent and persistent over time. When a customer
can predict your behaviour, that customer is more likely to invest
you with trust.
Step four: Approach meetings as relationship-building
opportunities
Every customer meeting is an opportunity to build or strengthen
the relationship, provided you remember that the messenger (who you
are) is much more important than the message (what you to say). In
fact, far from being a "sales pitch
," a customer meeting
should be a quest to come up with ways that you the customer can
help each other to become more successful. To do this, you must
follow the following three touchstones.
Seek the truth
. You want to
fine out if you really have something that can help the
customer. To do this, the meeting must be a quest to discover the