gargling with 1:.10 dilution of 3 per cent hydrogen peroxide
(sold in pharmacies) also keeps the stubborn bacterial flora of
this region low. Hydrogen peroxide is for external use and should
not be swallowed. If accidentally swallowed drink excess water and
see your doctor. The between-teeth areas are also bacterial havens
and can be reached with tooth picks and dental floss regularly.
Bacteria hide well in between the molar teeth which may receive
less attention than the front teeth during brushing. Care should be
taken to brush the molar teeth well. During the day, drinking small
amounts of water every couple of hours helps to flow off bacteria
which will pass into the stomach and be destroyed by stomach acid.
Mouth odor that accumulates during silent work may thus be reduced.
Talking every now and then rather than keeping the mouth shut for
hours and singing occasionally helps to vent the lungs, throat, and
mouth, clearing odour.
Bacteria love the warm and moist areas of the arm pits. Keeping
the hair cleared or low is helpful. Washing with soap may not be
adequate. These areas may need regular gentle scrubbing with raffia
or other type of sponge to remove dead skin and bacteria around the
hair follicles. After bathing, if the armpits are rubbed with a few
drops of 50-70 per cent alcohol (sold in pharmacies) or
"spirit" they can remain fresh for most of the day, even
with heavy sweating. Sweat alone is usually odorless. It is
bacterial action that fouls it. Alcohol kills the bacteria and
therefore your sweat stays odorless without enough bacteria to foul
it.
Bacteria also love the warm and moist genital areas. These areas
are too sensitive to alcohol. The feminine clefts should be
accessed during bathing and washed with soap. Scrubbing of the
female delicate skin can lead to damage. Scrubbing is helpful in
removing dead skin and cleaving bacteria from the anal and scrotal
regions. A little disinfectant in bathing water is helpful for
antibacterial protection of the genital areas. For most parts of