How to nurture customer relationship during
meltdown
Step one: Decide that you want to have more fun in your
job
Traditional wisdom says that the purpose of having better
customer relationships is to sell more products to those customers.
However, while higher sales figures are a natural by-product of
better customer relationships, the real reason to have better
customer relationships is to make the job of selling more fun and
fulfilling. Think about it this way: wouldn’t you rather be
spending time with people whom you like, and who like you in
return, than trying to manipulate people into buying things that
they may not want or need? Talking with people, and learning about
their lives, is inherently interesting and fun, provided your goal
in building a relationships isn’t self-serving. In that context,
selling is merely a way of helping the person with whom you have a
good business relationship, rather than an end in itself.
Step two: Be someone who attracts good customer
relationships
Customers choose to have relationships with sales reps who
exhibit four key attributes:
Professionalism
: There’s a huge difference between
professionals and amateurs. People want to do business with
individuals who are serious about what they do, and who are willing
to take the time to achieve a deep understanding of their craft. A
good way to increase your level of professionalism is to read the
trade journals for your industry that hone your business
skills.
Integrity: Integrity is being as good as
your word. If you say you’re going to do something, then your
customer knows it will be done. Integrity is also exhibited when
you’re willing to take a stand, even when it’s unpopular with you
customer or your company. That does not mean being adversarial, but
rather having the ability to make decisions based upon what you
know is right.
Caring: People value relationships with
people who care about them. A good way to show that you care about
a customer is to listen, really listen, to what the customer has to
say.
Knowledge: People respect people who have