Controlling body odour
You step out of your place in the queue at your bank. You had
thought you would put up with it but your resistance breaks down.
The woman in front of you and the man behind you have something in
common. They have not been kind to their own arm pits.
You had planned for a two-hour stretch in the library and you
were tucked into your books. Suddenly, there is bad odour. You look
under the table and the handsome guy across from you had slipped
off his shoes. Bye to library. Your colleague is enthusiastically
explaining the circulated memo to you at close range and you shut
her up – quickly! You are nagging your driver in spite of his
petting you with "Mummy", "Madam" and a
thousand "Ma". The truth is you hate being sealed up in
your car air conditioning with his body odour. In the quiet of your
sitting room, you initiated an impromptu dance with your
girlfriend. You cut it off sooner than expected because her hair
was not fresh.
Body odour (B.O.) is unpleasant smell from the
body. It is irritating and repulsive and it can make people
spiteful towards the bearer. It is caused by excretions and
bacterial action on secreted body fluids and it is especially a
problem in tropical areas where bacterial action can be rapid.
Refinement is not a privilege of rich and educated people. It does
require some effort but it is not necessarily expensive. Everybody
– from cleaner and market woman to university professor and
business magnate, young and old, illiterate and educated, rich and
poor – can enjoy personal refinement without much cost.
Refinement helps us to have good relationships with others. When
we lack refinement, it can bring out the worst in people (though a
virtuous person would show tolerance and kindness towards everyone
in spite of people’s lack of refinement).
Within the family, starting from husband and wife, romance
disappears, fun diminishes and tempers set in when partners cannot
enjoy each other’s company and closeness. The family’s physical and