Getting the practice group to work
If trying to get other partners involved in implementing the
practice group does not work, then a personal appeal to having them
not become overly critical during the transition period may at
least neutralize their disruptive capabilities.
Ask them to suggest ways in which to keep the initiative on a
positive and constructive course, recognising that sometimes as
professionals, they are extremely analytical and critical of every
new endeavour.
Keep in mind that your most powerful management tool, as a
managing or principal partner, is attention. Whatever it is that
you devote attention to, invest time in, are seen to be giving
priority, is therefore deemed by all of those who look to you for
guidance, as important!
Therefore, the next thing you must do is to review your calendar
and determine how many of those practice group meetings you can
drop in on over the next month.
Your presence will signify both to the practice leader and, more
importantly, to the team members, that this is something you are
seriously interested in.
By attending the entire meeting you will gain some first-hand
experience at observing how the group reacts and what significant
issue are unearthed. Some firms encourage their practice groups to
have regular meetings while others make it mandatory that groups
meet at least monthly.
Whichever is your firm’s policy preference, there is no
substitute for the enthusiasm that can result from having the
managing partner or some member of the executive committee show
interest in the group’s activities by volunteering to attend one of
their meetings as an outside observer.
This can be an excellent means of both observing the group’s
progress as well as contributing some substantive ideas. Among
those firms that are progressing well with practice group, it was
observed that the executive committee divided all of the firm’s
various groups among themselves so as not to impose any onerous
time commitments on any one member.
It then suggested to practice leaders (one-on-one) that when
they schedule their next meeting, they would welcome sitting-in as
an observer.