the body keeping bacteria low also keeps fungi off as fungi are
often opportunists, capitalizing on areas where bacteria have
invaded and lowered the body’s barriers.
Underwear should be changed as needed and in the tropics, cotton
material (rather than synthetics) is useful good body ventilation
and for easily soaking up sweat and allowing it to be
evaporated.Underwear should not be repeated before washing.
These habits limit our vulnerability to genital disease-causing
organisms that can be picked up in public facilities. Even the air
in these areas can be loaded with microbial pores. There is no real
danger if we have hygienic habits because these microbes won’t have
a chance to thrive on our bodies
The feet need daily scrubbing. The nails need occasional
pedicure to remove dirt, bacteria, and fungus under the nails and
around the nails. Occasionally (once a month) the feet should be
soaked in water with added disinfectant for 10-30 minutes. This
soaking kills bacteria hiding in areas not reached by daily
scrubbing. It also softens callous skin and this can be removed by
gentle scraping. If this is not done, the microbes react with sweat
and dead skin and create a pungent odour. Shoes should be aired
when taken off. The inside of shoes should be cleaned regularly
with a damp soapy cloth and followed by disinfectant. Avoid
transferring dirt and bacteria from the exterior to the interior of
shoes when the shoes are cleaned. Different cleaning cloths should
be used for the outside and the inside. Shoes can also be
conditioned by placing them under the hot sun after cleaning. Avoid
wearing closed shoes all the time in the tropics. Alternate covered
shoes with ventilated footwear.
Finally, the home environment if not well cleaned and
disinfected, can harbour bacteria, fungi, and other micro-beings
which cover the surfaces we touch, and their spores which fill the
air that we breathe.
These means for good health are accessible to all because they
are easy and inexpensive. They are helpful for people with mild
B.O. as well as those with strong B.O.
cased by genetic or medical