Living healthy during this Ramadan
Ramadan is a month when Muslim faithful fast 
    and learn to exercise self-control. On the other hand, well 
    balanced food is the key to healthy leaving.
Fasting generally, apart from its spiritual obligation, is good 
    for one’s health. Abstaining from food and water for a period of 
    time makes a person more physically fit and mentally alert.
In order to remain hale and hearty throughout 
    Ramadan, normal quantities of food from the 
    major food groups, such as bread, cereal, milk and dairy products, 
    fish, meat, poultry, beans, vegetable and fruits should be 
    eaten.
Sufficient water and juices should be taken during 
    Iftar (Saari) and then between 
    Sahur (breaking time) and 
    Iftar to avoid dehydration. Intake of large 
    amounts of caffeine-based beverages should be avoided, especially 
    at Sahur, because this could cause insomnia.
Also, drinking too much tea during Sahur, 
    will make one pass more urine and inescapably cause the loss of 
    valuable mineral salts that your body would otherwise need during 
    the day. Try as much as possible to drink and eat fruits at the 
    beginning and end of each meal, especially at 
    Sahur
For overweight people, this is also an opportunity to 
    get rid of excess weight/fat.
How to prepare:
- Gingered apple cider juice
1 inch piece ginger
3 apples
Process through a juicer and serve.
- Mango orange apple juice
1 mango
1 orange
1 apple
Peel the orange, core the apple and cut all of the 
    fruit into sections. Juice and enjoy.
- Vibrant cocktail
1/2 fresh pineapple
2 carrots
Peel the pineapple and juice everything and 
    serve
- Tropical juice flair
¼ of a pineapple
1 mango
1 medium tomato
Remove the skin of the pineapple and cut into pieces. 
    Peel the mango and cut into spears. Juice the pineapple and mango 
    pieces with the tomato. Place the juice in a sealable container, 
    shake the juice thoroughly and pour into glasses 
    
