Follow your passion and start to determine in which direction your
energies can be better utilized for effective results.There are
generally four categories of people. The category you fall into is
usually determined by who you are inside you, your strengths, your
fears, your likes and dislikes. This explains why one man‘s meat is
another man‘s poison.
For example, are you an employee? This category of people prefer
a good steady job where the salaries are guaranteed every month
with good benefits to back it up. They are mainly individuals who
are security-oriented, and they are happy in employments once there
exists binding agreements on their employers. They could be CEOs,
Secretaries, or even Security men in any organization, but
insecurity and uncertainty are their worst enemies. So, if you are
one of those who hate the feeling of fear that comes with economic
uncertainty and you are unwilling to take the risk of
self-employment, then employment with a secure organization with
good benefits will be the best for you.
Others prefer to be Self-employed. These are usually
professionals who desire nothing other than to be their own boss.
They hate having their income being dictated by others. If they
work hard, they expect to be paid well for it and they are not in
any way disturbed if they receive nothing for work left undone. The
Self-Employed type expects his pay to be commensurate with the
quality of his work. They are true artists with their own style of
doing things, and usually believe that no one can do a better
job.
For this group of people, their independence, freedom and the
desire to gain respect as experts in their field is much more
important to them. They find it difficult to employ people like
themselves because they have the notion that no one can be as good
as them. And this means that they have to work much harder because
most things are done by them. This group responds to their fears,
not by seeking security, but by taking control of their destiny.