mental health can be affected by lack of care in controlling
odours. We need to take care of our bodies as well as our
environments. In Nigeria, lack of water and lack of electricity can
compound our efforts.
The body areas of concern are the scalp (for black women), the
mouth, the arm pits, the genital areas, and the feet. These areas
typically harbour moisture from sweat and small but mighty microbes
that thrive in such moisture. The microbes include bacteria and
fungi and we need to learn how to not give them a chance. Personal
habits, cleanliness of our environment including the air, and using
medical remedies are all important for controlling body odour.
Habits include regular "cures" such as manicure and
pedicure, teeth flossing, hair dressing and daily grooming.
Generally, prevention is better than cure. Dirt should be removed
not covered up. Spraying perfume to cover smell is not hygienic.
The effort should be to keep bacterial and fungal action under
control. Washing oneself well and then enhancing freshness with
perfume makes us pleasant. Too much perfume can distract or disturb
others. In the tropics, bathing twice daily is common habit.
Changing clothes, especially undergarments after each use instead
of repeating them before washing is important.
Black women with permed hair sometimes insist of keeping a style
till it wears out. This may be too many days during which sweat and
bacterial and fungal action can accumulate odour. Women therefore
need to have alternative ways of presenting their hair: styling,
washing and packing, as well as effectively using head-ties,
attachments, and wigs alternatively with hair styling. Thus they
can maintain beauty without compromising hygiene.
Teeth may be brushed several times a day with freshening paste:
early in the morning to regain freshness, after major meals to
limit plaque build-up, and before going to bed to minimize
bacterial action during sleep. The tongue accumulates layers of
food debris and should be brushed also. The back of the tongue is a
hideout for microbes and should be reached by the brush. Occasional