Analysing Teaching Media
The teaching strategy, which we have generated, will now be used 
    to direct the relation, design and implementation of teaching 
    methods and media.
The familiar methods of teaching in higher education to support 
    learning as it is commonly understood occurs through acquisition 
    (so we offer lectures and reading), through practice (we set 
    exercises and problems), through discussion (we conduct seminars 
    and tutorials) and through discovery (we arrange practicals and 
    field trips).
These methods when practised in combination are definitely 
    capable of satisfying the learning process. However, the feedback 
    on students' actions is the weakest link not really 
    emphasised. Sometimes, this is handled within the assessment 
    procedures adopted for set work and within supervised practicals 
    and tutorials.
However, a teacher who is faced with a series of classes with a 
    large group of students and given what is agreed as the 
    conversational character of the teaching-learning process, makes 
    one wonder about roles the various media can possibly play.
Romiszowski (1988) defines a media as the carrier of messages 
    from some transmitting source (which may be a human being or an 
    inanimate object) to the receiver of the message (which in our 
    cause is the learner). Educational 
    media can also be classified as "discursive, adaptive, 
    interactive and reflective meeting the conditions and definitions 
    earlier stated. A list of required media characteristic should 
    encompass a complete specification of what is required of a 
    learning situation. This include the following:
(i) Audio-visual media method
(ii) Hypermedia method
(iii) Interactive media method
(iv) Adaptive media method
(v) Discursive media method
(i) Audio Visual Media Method
(a) Lecture
The lecture method, which has been used by lecturers for many 
    years, is neither interactive nor adaptive. Unfortunately 80 per 
    cent of the information students receive from their lecturers comes 
    through the lecture method. The lecture method allows the coverage 
    of materials to be achieved with a large class of students within a 
    given period of time. It does not encourage reflection by the 
    students. It only puts a tremendous burden on the students to 
    engage in the full range of mathemagenic activities: Students must 
    do the work to render the implicit structure explicit to 
    themselves. They must also encourage themselves to reflect on the 
    relationship between what the lecturer is saying and what they 
    previously understood, decide if it is different and how the 
    difference is to be resolved. They should be able to check whether 
    this is compatible with everything else the lecturer said, thus 
    initiating their own reflective activities, retrospectively using 
    the notes of the lecturer. Their personal redescriptions are then 
    displayed in tutorial classes or essays, which elicit feedback from 
    their teacher to complete the discursive loop. These in effect can 
    be done, but possibilities of breakdown or failure are numerous. 
    Because of these limitations, many lecturers sometimes use other 
    techniques to address the activities omitted in the form of 
    questions to students and their answers allow the lecturer to 
    refine their descriptions and explanations.
(b) The Print
Print is often the most important educational medium that 
    satisfies one of the requirements of the conversational framework 
    where the teachers can describe their conception. It is the easiest 
    medium to design (single author), to produce (publishing 
    mechanism), to deliver (bookshops and libraries), to handle (light 
    and portable) and to use (random access, contents).
Print is similar to lecture, but it is controllable by the 
    student i.e. they can control the topic focus, and 
    re-read, skip, browse and, go to another topic. In so doing, they 
    control the pace of delivery of the material.
A major advantage over the lecture method is that it is more 
    complete and better presented than their notes.
One major disadvantage of the print is that it fails to be 
    interactive, adaptive or reflective. To counter these essential 
    deficiencies, a number of design features could be adopted such 
    as:
(i) stating the learning objectives as a way of clarifying the 
    topic goal.
(ii) the use of in-text questions and activities to provide a 
    form of interaction.
(iii) the provision of supplementary texts alongside for 
    students who need to spend more time on some aspects of the work to 
    improve adaptively.
(iv) the provision of self-assessment questions (SAQs) to help 
    students reflect on what they know.
The combination of activities and SAQs enable the print to be 
    more discursive by inviting the students to describe and even 
    redescribe their conception in the light of further reading.
(c) Audio-Vision
The audio-cassette as a medium is more controllable, though less 
    so than print, and uses the auditory channel rather than the 
    visual, which means it has the tremendous potential for students 
    who cannot easily read. The audio-cassette can offer a vicarious 
    experience of discussion such as a recorded tutorial or academic 
    debate.
For this reason, the medium achieves a degree of interactivity. 
    Moreover, since the audio commentary is designed to interpret, then 
    the student is receiving tutorial at both levels of experience and 
    description of experience, thus making the medium a surprisingly 
    powerful one.
(d) Television
Broadcast Television can be used in cases where campuses are 
    distributed or where there are widely distributed students in 
    distance learning universities. Like the lecture, it is not 
    discursive, interactive, adaptive nor reflective, and is not 
    self-paced. Its principal contrast with lectures is that it can use 
    dynamic analogue images as well as language. Television is able to 
    convey a way of experiencing the world, because it provides an 
    exciting experience through dynamic sound and vision and uses a 
    number of technical devises to manipulate that experience such as 
    "supplanation". Supplanation allows our perception of the 
    world through television to imitate our perception of the real 
    world. The most interesting role for television as a unique medium 
    lies in its rhetorical power constrained in the interests of 
    balance and objectivity and these advantages can be exploited 
    effectively to assist students' learning. In its canonical 
    form, however, television covers at most three of the required 
    activities within the conversational framework: the teachers' 
    description, the teachers set tasks and intrinsic feedback on the 
    teachers' actions.
(e) Video
Video can be easily controlled and adaptive to the students. It 
    enables the student to carry out activities in-between watching 
    sections and to carry out analytical exercises on the video 
    material itself. Video has the same ability as television to bring 
    together an experience and a description of that experience. It is 
    self-paced and can enhance the opportunities for students to 
    reflect on what they are doing. However, it is not fully discursive 
    (giving extrinsic feedback) nor fully interactive (giving intrinsic 
    feedback).
(ii) The Hypermedia Method
The Hypertext
The hypertext according to Jonassen (1991) is a computer-based 
    software system for organising and storing information. The 
    information items are documents that may include text of varying 
    length, pictures, diagrams and sound bites to name some. The 
    hypertext system can emulate a rich variety of interactions with an 
    information database. Hypertext can be controlled by the user, 
    hence the searching, indexing, referencing are well supported by 
    the options and iconic forms used in these systems.
The use of mouse clicks and pull-down menus to move around a 
    large database makes accessing and displaying an item of 
    information very convenient and the flexibility of the system for 
    the user makes it easily explicit and highly accessible.
Hypertext offers a useful tool for students who need to do 
    extensive library work, which enables them to produce extensive 
    documented information.
The World Wide Web (www), for example, is a global collection of 
    computers called servers within the Internet which host Hypertext 
    Mark-up language (HTML) files/documents or Web papers. It is a 
    powerful medium that can be used to easily access the world's 
    information through the Internet. The Internet itself is a global 
    interconnection of heterogeneous computer networks that make use of 
    wired and wireless links, optical fibres and the Internet Protocol 
    (IP) suite. Using special software called browser, in conjunction 
    with special search engine servers, users can easily access and 
    display their files at their web suites.
Virtual systems are also systems which provide access to 
    information and services remotely or through appropriate 
    connections to libraries, laboratories, and information centres.
Because it offers no intrinsic feedback nor has any specific 
    goal, being simply a connected database, hypertext can neither be 
    adaptive nor reflective, but it is a means of acquiring and 
    constructing knowledge. For somebody who needs instant access to a 
    large body of related material, a hypertext system will be 
    valuable. As an information retrieval system, hypertext can access 
    documents consisting of information stored in any form.
(iii) The Interactive Media Methods
(a) Simulation
Simulation is a computer based programme that embodies some 
    model of an aspect of the world which could take several forms such 
    as a system of equations, a set of procedures, a set of 
    condition-action rules. It allows the user to make inputs to the 
    model, runs the model and displays the results (Laurillard, 1993). 
    Making inputs to the model then take the form of selecting 
    parameters of change, choosing parameters and values within a range 
    or choosing when to change parameters. This input determines the 
    subsequent behaviour of the model which is then displayed either as 
    numerical values, a diagram, a picture or as a description of its 
    new state. Simulations are useful for representing complex 
    relations, hence it could be used to give students a sense of 
    relationship between certain parameters. For this reason, 
    simulation is a kind of experiential learning and encourages 
    qualitative reasoning. Simulations are based on any model, the 
    model may be a structural topic hidden in the depths of the 
    programmes or it may be a set of rules consisting of a statement 
    such as "if, then "call procedure" or else ask 
    questions. In general practice, simulations are often embedded in a 
    teaching context which enables students to describe their 
    conception in the form of write-up on their work on the 
    simulations. Simulations give intrinsic feedback on students' 
    actions, hence it is interactive, but it does not comment on them 
    or discuss them, so it is not discursive. A simulation is 
    controllable by the students, because by selecting parameters to 
    change they can effectively determine the topic focus, however it 
    is not reflective.
(b) Microworld
Microworld is also another computer based programme that allows 
    students to express their description of some aspect of the world 
    in a form understandable by, and therefore, inspectable by the 
    programme. What makes microworld interesting is that they appear to 
    address explicit description of the students' point of view. A 
    student, for example, has to describe on the form of a set of 
    commands, and then run them as one would run a programme and the 
    result is either the intended behaviour or something unexpected. 
    Microworld is important because it encourages students to reflect 
    upon their interaction. It is also controllable by the students, it 
    is interactive, it is adaptive. It supports reflection and 
    interaction at a certain level of description.
(c) Modelling
Modelling is a computer programme that invites the learner to 
    create their own model of a system, defined mathematically and then 
    run, allowing the output to be compared with the stored data of a 
    real world system. In a modelling programme, the programme merely 
    interpretes formula (or rules in mathematical or graphical forms 
    only). When students are modelling, they are creating their own 
    representatives and are learning something about the nature of 
    theory building. Many computer modelling in science, for example, 
    are representations of dynamic processes. Such models involve a 
    specification of the initial condition, and an algorithm, which is 
    executed to determine how the system evolves over time. Examples 
    are models of mechanical systems, chemical reactions, meteorology 
    and ecological systems. Modelling is fully controllable by the 
    students and gives feedback on students' action. Modelling 
    programme is one of the closest so far that can support the 
    learning of academic knowledge.
