ABSTRACT
Concentrations of the trace metals lead, iron, copper and zinc 
    were estimated in crops harvested in some oil prospecting locations 
    in Rivers State, Nigeria. The locations were; Agbada-Aluu (AA), 
    Ebocha (EB), Idu Ekpeye (IE), Obagi (OB) and Trans Amadi Layout 
    (TA), with the Teaching and Research Farm of Rivers State 
    University of Science and Technology, Port Harcourt as control. 
    Crops investigated were cassava (Manihot 
    esculenta), cocoyam (Colocasia 
    esculenta), okra (Hibiscus 
    esculentus), pumpkin leaves (Telfairia 
    occidentalis) and waterleaf (Talinum 
    traingulare). Results of the mean lead concentrations 
    were from 1.1 µg/g in cocoyam to 9.1 µg/g in 
    okro, showing higher trends in the 
    industrialized areas. While cocoyam had the lowest lead 
    concentration, the concentration rest of the crops did not differ 
    significantly from one another. Crops from locations TA, OB, IE and 
    EB had significantly higher concentrations of lead, although IE, AA 
    and TF were not significantly different from one another. Mean 
    concentrations of iron were between 40 µg/g in cassava from TF, and 
    651 µg/g in pumpkin leaves from TA - the industrial base of Rivers 
    State -reflecting a high 
    level of pollution from the various industries in that location. 
    Differences in concentration of iron in crops showed pumpkin leaves 
    to have the highest level of iron, followed by the other green 
    vegetables - waterleaf and okra 
    -although no significant differences occurred between okra, 
    cocoyam and cassava. Copper concentrations were between 4.4 
    µg/g in cocoyam from locations TF and 23 µg/g in pumpkin leaves 
    from TA. Pumpkin leaves had the highest concentrations of copper, 
    followed by okra, then waterleaf, with cocoyam and cassava having 
    the least significant levels. Zinc concentrations in crops were 
    between 29 µg/g in cocoyam from TF to 240 µg/g in pumpkin leaves 
    from EB. Pumpkin leaves and okra contained the highest levels of 
    the metal, followed by waterleaf, then cassava and finally cocoyam. 
    In terms of location, TA, OB and EB had the highest concentrations 
    in crops, the least occurring in TF and AA. These results reflect 
    higher concentrations of metals in crops from the industrialized 
    locations, with the green vegetables, particularly pumpkin leaves, 
    having the highest uptake, while cocoyam invariably had the least. 
    These findings give cause for concern, particularly as heavy metals 
    are bio-accumulative in the system and portend a serious health 
    risk to man and animals.
INTRODUCTION
Increased human activities such as industrialization, coupled 
    with over-population and increased ambient temperature amongst 
    other factors, have become major environmental issues in recent 
    years. Activities of oil prospecting and other industries result in 
    pollution through gas flares, constant oil spills, and industrial 
    effluence which affect both aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems, 
    with destruction of forest and farmlands [1,2]. Rivers State, which 
    is located in the Niger Delta region of Nigeria, is endowed with 
    abundant oil resources, giving rise to increased industrial 
    activities. Refining and petroleum companies account for about 
    70-75 percent of industrial activities in the region [3]. Petroleum 
    refineries produce a wide variety of air and water pollutants and 
    hazardous solid wastes. The specific mix of pollutants varies with 
    the activities and processes involved. Frequently emitted 
    pollutants include all the distillation products of refining. 
    Because these facilities are usually sited in large industrial 
    zones, often involving multiple petrochemical facilities, 
    significant contamination of air, soil and water is usually 
    associated with their presence. Residents of adjoining communities 
    are potentially at risk from the inhalation of polluted air and the 
    ingestion of polluted water. Large volumes of hazardous wastes are 
    generated and must be appropriately disposed of, or they may 
    adversely affect health through the contamination of soils and 
    ground water [4]. Rapid industrialization, intensive agriculture 
    and other anthropogenic activities have led to land degradation, 
    environmental pollution and decline in crop productivity and 
    sustainability. These have been of great concern to human and 
    animal health.
One of the prominent sources contributing to increased load of 
    soil contamination is disposal of municipal and industrial wastes. 
    These wastes are either dumped on roadsides or used as land fills, 
    while sewage is used for irrigation. These wastes, although useful 
    as a source of nutrients, are also sources of carcinogens and toxic 
    metals. Other industrial activities that take place include those 
    from steel, glass, and paint manufacturing. Discharges from these 
    industrial activities pollute the air, water and soil, endangering 
    the environment as they ultimately find their way into the food 
    chain, albeit in small doses. These accumulate overtime and across 
    trophic levels to pose serious health hazards to man [5].
Exposure to very low levels of elements such as lead, cadmium 
    and mercury have been shown to have cumulative effects since there 
    is no homeostatic mechanism which can operate to regulate the 
    levels of these toxic substances [6,7,8]. The major pollutants from 
    industrial discharge have been shown to be lead, mercury, nickel, 
    arsenic, zinc and copper. Lead intoxication has been reported to be 
    associated with neurological problems, renal tubular dysfunction 
    and anemia [6,9]. Although zinc and copper are essential trace 
    elements which may also serve as plant nutrients, they may be used 
    as components of paint pigments. Consequently, their undue presence 
    in the environment through industrial discharge can also be 
    hazardous to man [10,11].
Heavy metal absorption is governed by soil characteristics such 
    as pH and organic matter content [12,13]. Thus, high levels of 
    heavy metals in the soil do not always indicate similar high 
    concentrations in plants. The extent of accumulation will depend on 
    the plant and heavy metal species under consideration. In an 
    investigation of the uptake of Cd, Cu, Ni and Pb from air and soil 
    by Achillea millefolium (milfoil) and 
    Hordeum vulgare (barley) in Denmark, it was 
    concluded that Cu and Pb plant concentrations correlated with 
    aerial deposition but not with soil concentrations, [14]. In 
    contrast, Ni and Cd content in the plants correlated with 
    deposition and soil content.
In Nigeria, a study of metal concentration near Warri refinery 
    found three to seven times elevated levels of various heavy metals 
    in the soil [15]. Although the petroleum industry is by far the 
    largest industrial sub sector in the Niger Delta, at least six of 
    the eight most polluting industrial sub sectors in Nigeria (steel 
    works, metal fabrication, food processing, textiles, refineries and 
    paint manufacturing) operate in the Niger Delta. The Industrial 
    Directory for Rivers State lists over 500 companies, but most of 
    these employ fewer than ten people. Only 112 companies employ more 
    than 50 workers [16]. The medium and large scale industries are 
    concentrated on the Trans-Amadi Industrial Layout. The petroleum 
    industry, including the refinery, generates most of the estimated 
    5,500 tons of hazardous wastes produced per year in Rivers State 
    [17].
The increasing industrialization, particularly due to oil 
    exploration and exploitation in Rivers State, Nigeria has created 
    consciousness of the pollution of the environment and possible 
    dangers emanating from such activities. Whilst literature is 
    replete with data on heavy metal concentration in water, aquatic 
    life and the mangrove swamp, few data exist in the Niger Delta 
    region on heavy metal concentration in food crops. This study was 
    therefore designed to investigate the concentration of the heavy 
    metal lead and the essential trace elements iron, copper and zinc 
    in food crops harvested around some oil prospecting and other 
    industrial areas of Rivers State in Nigeria.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study Location
The study locations were Agbada (Aluu) (AA), Ebocha (EB), Idu 
    Ekpeye (IE), Obagi (OB), Trans-Amadi Industrial Layout (TA) and 
    Rivers State University of Science and Technology Teaching/Research 
    Farm (TF). The University teaching farm, which is not located in 
    the vicinity of any industrial or oil-prospecting zone, was chosen 
    as the control. Ebocha, Idu Ekpeye and Obagi are oil 
    prospecting/exploration areas. Agbada (Aluu), on the other hand, is 
    an abandoned gas flaring site with a derelict borrow pit, while 
    Trans-Amadi is the industrial base in Rivers state, Nigeria.
Collection of Samples
Food crops used for the study were commonly consumed staples and 
    vegetables. These were: Cassava (Manihot 
    esculenta), a root crop and cocoyam corm 
    (Colocasia esculenta); the vegetables were: 
    pumpkin leaves (Telfairia occidentalis), 
    waterleaf (Talinum trangulare) and okra 
    (Hibiscus esculentus), a fruit vegetable. The 
    crops were harvested at the peak of the harvest period between the 
    months of May and July, from farms sited at oil prospecting or 
    other industrial areas. The peak of the harvest period was chosen 
    when farm crops were generally in their bloom, bearing in mind the 
    fact that metal concentration in plants varies with the age of the 
    plant as well as the season [2]. By arrangement with the respective 
    farm owners, the various crops were randomly harvested from two or 
    three farms within each location. Samples of each crop collected 
    were wrapped in brown calico and transported to the laboratory for 
    drying and analysis.
Preparation of Samples
Similar crop types collected from the different farms at each 
    location were pooled. The green vegetables were removed from the 
    stem before pooling, then washed in de-ionized water, drained in a 
    colander and shredded prior to drying. The okra was similarly 
    washed in de-ionized water and diced prior to drying. The root 
    crops were also washed in water to remove soil and dirt, then 
    peeled and sliced thinly before drying. All samples were dried in 
    an air oven at 600C for about 72 hours, 
    then cooled to ambient temperature, milled by means of a hammer 
    mill and sieved through a mesh of 1mm diameter. The milled samples 
    were stored in airtight plastic containers until required for 
    analysis.
Determination of metals
Concentrated HNO3 (3ml) and 0.5ml 
    H2SO4 were added to a 
    50ml flask containing 1g ground oven-dried plant sample and 1ml of 
    60% HCLO4 and 0.5 ml concentrated 
    H2SO4. The flask was 
    swirled gently and the contents digested slowly on an 
    electrothermal heater to 2500C for 15 
    minutes. The increase in temperature was gradual until it reached 
    2500. The digest was then cooled and 
    filtered through 541 Whatman filter paper into a volumetric flask 
    and diluted to 50 ml with distilled water. The residual acid 
    concentration of the digested sample was brought to 1% v/v after 
    digestion. The digested samples were analysed for trace metals, 
    using the Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer, Model 451 [18]. The 
    instrument was calibrated using standard solutions of lead, iron, 
    copper and zinc. The absorbances obtained were used in calculating 
    the concentrations of the metals in the different samples.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Statistical analysis of the data obtained was done using 
    analysis of variance (ANOVA) according to the method of Wahua [19]. 
    The least significant difference (LSD) was applied to show the 
    means differences at 5% level of significance.
RESULTS
Lead
The results in Figures 1a, b and c show the mean concentrations 
    of lead in various crops viz: cassava, cocoyam, okra, pumpkin 
    leaves and waterleaf at various locations, namely: Agbada-Aluu 
    (AA), Ebocha (EB), Idu Ekpeye (IE), Obrikom (OB), Trans-Amadi (TA) 
    and the University Teaching and Research Farm (TF). In Figure 1a 
    mean concentrations of lead in the various crops ranged from 1.1 µg/g in cocoyam from location TF to 9.1 µg/g in okra in 
    location TA. Details of the lead concentration are as follows: 
    Cassava (root): from 1.2 µg/g in TF to 7.4 µg/g in 
    OB; Cocoyam (corm): between 1.1 µg/g in TF and 2.6 
    µg/g in EB, Okra between 2.9 µg/g in EB and 9.1 µg/g 
    in TA; for pumpkin leaves (Telfairia 
    occidentalis), lead concentrations ranged from 2.4 
    µg/g and 2.6 µg/g in locations AA and TF respectively, to 
    8.6 µg/g in location TA. Waterleaf had lead concentrations 
    between 2.0 µg/g in TF and 7.6 µg/g in EB.
