Fluoroquinolone Use in Children: the Benefits and 
    Risks
KA Oshikoya Lagos State University, College of 
    Medicine, Lagos Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics 
    Lecturer II
Summary
Background:
Fluoroquinolones are widely used in the treatment of various 
    infectious diseases in adults because of their broad spectrum of 
    activity, their significant tissue penetration and the availability 
    of oral formulations. Their use in children has however, been 
    limited until recently as a result of possible 
    fluoroquinolone-induced joint toxicity. Nevertheless, these agents 
    are rapidly gaining consideration for use in children as new agents 
    are emerging with wider spectrum of action and minimal toxicity, 
    even in young children.
Objectives:
This review presents the pharmacokinetics, clinical indications, 
    and possible toxicity and safety profiles of fluoroquinolone in 
    children.
Methods:
A MEDLINE search for systematic reviews and original 
    publications on (a) fluoroquinolone use in adults, children and 
    animals, (b) clinical trials of fluoroquinolones in adults, and 
    
    (c)pharmacokinetics, efficacy and safety of the drugs in 
    children, was undertaken using Index Medicos and 
    PubMed. Abstracts from the searches were read to 
    determine their relevance and in most cases, the original article 
    was sourced to provide further information. Results: The search 
    yielded 23 relevant articles (three reviews, four clinical trials 
    and 16 original research work).
Conclusion:
When a particular antibiotic therapy fails or cannot be 
    tolerated, the use of fluoroquinolones should be seriously 
    considered as the potential benefits of their use may outweigh 
    concerns about safety and antimicrobial resistance.
Introduction
NALIDIXIC acid, developed in the 1960s, was the first quinolone 
    used to treat urinary tract 
    infections.1,2 During the past 40 years, 
    numerous modifications have been made to this antimicrobial to 
    develop the fluoroquinolones which have improved antimicrobial, 
    pharmacokinetic and therapeutic properties. The early 
    fluoroquinolones (ofloxacin, pefloxacin, and ciprofloxacin) have a 
    spectrum of activity that covers both gram-positive and gram- 
    negative pathogens.3-5 In the past, the 
    use of fluoroquinolones was restricted because of concern for 
    potential cartilage damage. However, their use has been on the 
    increase during the past decade in many parts of the world. They 
    have progressively become a mainstay in the treatment of serious 
    bacterial infections particularly in adults. However, following 
    early studies of the drugs in different immature animal models 
    demonstrating serious cartilage erosion and joint 
    malformations,6-11 these agents were 
    considered to be contraindicated in 
    children.12,13 In spite of this, 
    fluoroquinolones have been used in paediatric patients in selected 
    cases. Available data in children are largely the result of 
    ciprofloxacin use in selected patients with pulmonary infection, 
    (especially ystic fibrosis), chronic suppurative otitis media, 
    complicated urinary tract infection, uncomplicated gonorrhoea, 
    life-threatening salmonellosis and shigellosis, 
    antimicrobial-resistant meningitis, multidrug 
    - resistant tuberculosis, and 
    central nervous system (CNS) infection-conditions in which the 
    potential benefit was thought to outweigh the 
    risk.12-16
Most of the available data on the use of fluoroquinolones in 
    children are from developed countries. Few developing countries, 
    such as India, are beginning to use ciprofloxacin to treat 
    resistant neonatal sepsis resulting from gram-negative bacteria, 
    even in the very low birth weight premature babies, a group at high 
    risk of developing impaired linear 
    growth17 and in the treatment of acute 
    osteomyelitis in children with sickle cell disease in 
    Togo.18 Results emanating from such 
    studies have been very encouraging. Ciproflosacin has been shown not to have effect on linear 
    growth in infancy.17 In Africa, 
    literature is sparse on the use of fluoroquinolones in children, 
    however, it has been reported in Nigeria that most of the 
    gram-positive and gram - 
    negative bacteria causing pyogenic meningitis in children 
    are 100 percent sensitive to 
    ciprofloxacin.16
The gradual emergence of bacterial resistance to antibiotics 
    used to treat most of the childhood infectious diseases in the 
    developing countries, the high cost of the third generation 
    cephalosporins which are alternatives, lack of oral formulations of 
    the third generation cephalosporins, and longer duration of 
    hospital admission, necessitate the search for alternative 
    antimicrobial agents such as the fluoroquinolones. This article 
    reviews the evidence of the safety and risks of the 
    fluoroquinolones in all paediatric age groups.
Mechanism and Spectrum of Activity
The fluoroquinolones are bactericidal agents that act by 
    interfering with the enzyme DNA gyrase to inhibit bacterial DNA 
    synthesis.19 They have a very broad 
    spectrum antibacterial activity, being effective against most 
    gram-negative organisms, including Pseudomonas 
    aeruginosa, acinetobacter, campylobacter, haemophilus, 
    salmonella, shigella, klebsiella, and escherichia 
    species.17,20 Gram-positive coverage 
    includes most species of staphylococcus and streptococcus, 
    including many beta-lactam resistant strains. The early 
    fluoroquinolones were generally inactive against anaerobes. In 
    addition to their broad spectrum activity against the gram-negative 
    and gram-positive bacteria, some of the recently marketed 
    fluoroquinolones have an expanded activity against enterococci and 
    the anaerobes.21-25
Pharmacokinetics
Most of the fluoroquinolones are well absorbed following oral 
    administration, with excellent tissue penetration, and long 
    half-lives.26,28 They are excreted 
    unchanged in the urine.18 However, 
    pharmacokinetic data on fluoroquinolone are limited in children as 
    a consequence of their restricted use. The scanty data available in 
    children are on ciprofloxacin, ofloxacin, trovafloxacin, 
    gatifloxacin, and moxifloxacin.
Ciprofloxacin
In 1992, Peltoba et al studied 16 healthy 
    children (seven infants, nine children), all less than six years of 
    age, treated with a single oral dose (15mg/kg) of 
    ciprofloxacin.29 They reported a mean 
    peak concentration (Cmax) value of 3.3 mg/L and 2.1mg/ L in infants and children respectively, 
    while the mean time to reach Cmax 
    (tmax) was 1.18 and 1.0 hours, 
    respectively. There was no statistically significant difference in 
    the Cmax or tmax 
    between the two groups. The area under the curve (AUC) was greater 
    in infants (16.1 mg*h/L) than in children (5.3 
    mg*h/L). A mean elimination half-life (t1/2) 
    of 2.73 and 1.28 hours were reported in infants and 
    children, respectively. Ciprofloxacin elimination half-life 
    t1/2in children seemed shorter than in 
    adults (4-5 hours). Therefore, they suggested increasing the 
    frequency of oral ciprofloxacin to three times daily in children 
    aged 1-5 years.
The pharmacokinetiks of ciprofloxacin in children with cystic 
    fibrosis (CF) has been evaluated in two studies. In 1996, Schaefer 
    and co-workers studied the disposition of ciprofloxacin in 10 
    children, aged one to six years, with 
    CF.30 The patients received intravenous 
    infusions of 10mg/kg ciprofloxacin every 12 hours in two doses, 
    followed by oral administration of 15mg/kg every 12 hours.The mean 
    Cmax values were 8.5 and 8.3 
    mg/L after the first and second intravenous infusions, respectively 
    and 3.5 mg/L after the oral dose. Thirty four percent of 
    ciprofloxacin was protein bound as seen in the adults. In a second 
    study carried out in 1997, Rubio et al studied 
    the disposition of ciprofloxacin in 18 children, aged five to 17 
    years with CF.31 The patients received 
    10 mg/kg ciprofloxacin IV every eight hours for at least three 
    days, and were then switched to 20 mg/ kg ciprofloxacin orally 
    every 12 hours. Mean half-life values for the group were 2.6±0.6 hours with IV dosing and 3.4 ± 0.7 
    hours with oral dosing. Subgroup analysis revealed no significant 
    difference in elimination between the younger and older 
    children.
In another study in 1998, using an investigational ciprofloxacin 
    oral suspension in 16 healthy children, aged 0.3 to 7.1 years,32 and administering 10 mg/kg 
    of the drug every eight hours, Peltoba et al 
    reported a non-significantly different half-life values among the 
    subgroups, with values ranging from 4.21 ±1.1 hours 
    in patients aged one year, to 5.1 ± 1.1 hours in 
    children aged two to five years. The results of these studies 
    suggest that ciprofloxacin pharmacokinetic parameters in children 
    are similar to values established in adults.
Ofloxacin
The pharmacokinetics of oral and intravenous ofloxacin was 
    studied in 17 patients with typhoid fever, aged five to 14 
    years.33 Seven patients received 7.5 mg/kg ofloxacin orally followed by 7.5 mg/kg IV over 30 
    minutes, 10 patients received 7.5 mg/kg ofloxacin IV then 
    orally. The mean oral bioavailability was 91 percent, similar to 
    that of a healthy adult. The mean Cmax 
    ofloxacin was significantly higher after a single oral dose (5.5mg/L). The AUC values were 34.13 and 32.32 mg*h/L 
    following a single IV and oral doses, respectively. The mean 
    tmax values following single IV and oral 
    doses were 0.5 and 1.69 hours, respectively. The mean 
    apparent volume of distribution was 1.28 L/kg. The order of 
    the route of administration (IV first or oral first) had no 
    significant effect on the Cmax, 
    tmax or AUC.
Trovafloxacin
Trovafloxacin pharmacokinetic properties have also been studied 
    in infants and children.34 Six infants, 
    aged three to 12 months, and 14 children, aged 1.7 to 
    12.5 years, were given IV alatrofloxacin (prodrug of 
    trovafloxacin) 4 mg/kg as a single dose. The mean total clearance, 
    volume of distribution, and elimination half-life in the older 
    children were 0.135 L/h/kg, 1.74 L/kg and 9.42 
    hours, respectively; the corresponding values in infants were 
    0.158 L/h/kg, 1.72 L/kg, and 8.25 hours, 
    respectively. The pharmacokinetics in infants and children were 
    similar.
Moxifloxacin and Gatifloxacin
The disposition of gatifloxacin was studied in 76 children, aged 
    between six months and 16 years.34 
    Infants and young children received a single oral dose of 
    gatifloxacin suspension in an escalating dosage of 5, 10, or 
    15mg/kg (maximum of 600mg); older children received tablet 
    formulation at a dose of 10mg/kg. Gatifloxacin's apparent 
    clearance and half-life were 5.5 ± 2.1ml/min/kg and 
    5.1 ± 1.4h. The maximum plasma concentration of the 
    drug and area under the curve (AUC) increased in a manner 
    approximately proportional to the dose. At the 10mg/kg/dose, the 
    bioavailability was similar between the suspension and tablet 
    formulation. The apparent oral clearance of gatifloxacin, 
    normalized for body weight, exhibited a small but statistically 
    significant decrease with increasing age. In all subjects receiving 
    gatifloxacin at 10mg/kg, the AUC exceeded 
    20µg*h/ml, suggesting that gatifloxacin at this 
    dose every 24h will achieve therapeutic concentrations in plasma in 
    infants and children.
Clinical Usefulness and Advantages
In children, the fluoroquinolones represent a new class of 
    antimicrobials with a number of inherent advantages. However, their 
    usefulness in children was initially restricted by the potential 
    for these agents to induce cartilage toxicity in immature 
    animals.6-11 Of recent, several studies 
    have shown that the arthrogenic effects of the fluoroquinolones 
    appear to be species-specific and 
    drug-dependent.9 No such arthropathy has 
    been reported in children after the use of 
    ciprofloxacin,17 levofloxacin, 
    gatifloxacin, or moxifloxacin. Therefore, paediatricians are 
    increasingly encouraged to use this group of drugs although with 
    caution, in infants and children.
In addition to their excellent pharmacokinetic properties, they 
    are available in both oral and parenteral formulations. Therefore, 
    they offer a therapeutic alternative to the commonly used 
    antimicrobials in a number of clinical situations for which there 
    have been limited options (Table 1). These drugs have been used in 
    a number of these clinical situations in infants and children, with 
    beneficial effects reported. 
    15,17,18,30,35-53 Ofloxacin (15 
    mg/kg/day), ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin (both taken as 20 to 30 
    mg/kg/day) in two or three divided doses, are the most commonly 
    used agents. Gatifloxacin is effective and tolerable at a dose of 
    10mg/kg, once daily.
Hyperglycaemia due to fluoroquinolones on the other hand, is 
    likely to be due to overdosage or a toxic effect of the drug in 
    patients with concomitant renal 
    insufficiency.80Hyperglycaemia occurs 
    more often than hypoglycaemia and gatifloxacin has been reported to 
    have the highest risk.75
* Others
Transient elevations in the values of liver function tests or 
    serum creatinine81 and rarely greenish 
    discolouration of the teeth.82
Drug Interactions
Fluoroquinolones interact with many other medications and 
    nutrients (Tables II and III). A large percentage of these 
    interactions are the result of interference with cytochrome P450 
    1A2 function.18 Fluoroquinolones should 
    not be taken simultaneously with enteral feedings. Patients may 
    take fluoroquinolones with food, but should be instructed to avoid 
    taking dairy products such as milk and yoghurt, iron or zinc 
    supplements at the same time as a fluoroquinolone 
    dose.83 Multivalent cations such as 
    calcium, magnesium, aluminium, iron and zinc impair absorption of 
    fluoroquinolones. Dairy products and antacids are rich in calcium, 
    magnesium and aluminium,84 while iron is 
    routinely used in some children in Nigeria as blood 
    tonic,85zinc supplements are 
    also used in various childhood ailments such as 
    diarrhoea,86 
    pneumonia87 and 
    malaria.88
