Determinants of management outcome in open tibia fractures 
    in ile-ife
Abstract
Background: Fracture of 
    a normal tibia shaft constitutes a major trauma mostly sustained by 
    young adults during high-energy injuries. Its superficial location 
    and the subcutaneous characteristics of its anteromedial aspect 
    easily causes open fracture. The objectives of this study were to 
    determine the pattern of presentation, and determinants of 
    management outcome in open fractures of the tibia.
Methods: This is a 
    prospective hospital based study. A total of 89 patients aged 4 to 
    80 years with open fractures of the tibia with or without fibula 
    involvement were studied. All the patients received anti tetanus 
    prophylaxis and intravenous antibiotics as well as wound 
    irrigation, debridement and skeletal stabilisation.
Results: Students and 
    traders accounted for the majority of the cases (57.3%). 
    Most of the open tibia fractures 69 (77.5%) had above knee 
    Plaster of Paris cast. The majority of the cases were Gustilo and 
    Anderson type II 32 (36.0%) cases and type I 2 
    2(24.7%) cases. There was 
    Correlation between the presence of wound infection and (i) Gustilo 
    and Anderson grading (F -.352, P .001); (ii) Injury 
    to Debridement time in hours (F -.304, P .004); (iii) 
    Osteomyelitis (F .397, P .001); (iv) Delayed union (F 
    .253, P .017); and (v) Union time in weeks (F -.350, P .001). There was also correlation between the 
    following: (i) Injury to Debridement time in hours and the distance 
    from the accident scene to the hospital (F .464, P .001); (ii) The fracture pattern and the union time in weeks (F 
    .353, P .001); and (iii) The presence of 
    osteomyelities and delayed 
    union (F .382, P .001). The commonest complications 
    observed were wound infection 3 
    5(39..3%) patients and delayed union 3 
    0(33.7%) patients.
Conclusion:This study 
    shows that the higher the Gustilo and Anderson grading of the open 
    fractures of the tibia, the more severe the wound and bone 
    infection that occurred. The interval between injury time and wound 
    débridement time affected the treatment outcome.
Introduction
An open fracture is one in which there is a break in the 
    continuity of the skin and the underlying soft tissue. It also 
    leads directly into or communicates with the fracture and its 
    haematoma 1,2. The fracture of a normal 
    tibia shaft constitutes a major trauma. Most fractures are 
    sustained by young adults during high-energy injuries. Its 
    superficial location and the subcutaneous characteristics of its 
    anteromedial aspect easily cause open fracture 
    3. The wound classification system of 
    Gustilo and Anderson was used for this study. The import of this 
    classification is that it allows comparison of results of 
    scientific analysis, gives guidelines for prognosis and establishes 
    certain principles of treatment4,5.
The goals of treatment include the prevention of infection, 
    fracture healing and full functional recovery of the limb 
    6,7. The essentials of treatment include 
    immediate, meticulous and repeated wound debridement with copious 
    irrigation using normal saline, stabilisation of the fracture, 
    coverage of the wound, early parenteral administration of broad 
    spectrum antibiotics and early bone 
    grafting4,6,8,9. The pattern of 
    fractures would vary within different communities depending on the 
    type and speed of activities in the area. Similarly, the outcome of 
    treatment will depend on the type of care given to the 
    patient4,6,8, 
    10
The pattern of open fractures seen in a community with respect 
    to the severity and associated injuries depends on the common 
    causes. This in turn determines the management needs and outcome of 
    treatment. The objective of this study was to determine the pattern 
    of presentation, and factors influencing management outcome of the 
    open tibia fracture as seen at the Obafemi Awolowo University 
    Teaching Hospital, Ile-Ife. It is also hoped that problems and 
    aspects of management of these condition will be highlighted.
Patients And Methods
This is a prospective hospital based study carried out in 
    Obafemi Awolowo University Teaching Hospital Ile Ife. The patients 
    were recruited over an 18-month period. All patients presenting 
    with open fractures of the tibia with or without fibula involvement 
    were included except: those who have underlying bone pathology, 
    those who cannot establish the time of their injury, those who had 
    their initial wound debridement before arrival in our hospital, 
    those who have intra-articular fractures, and those who require 
    lower extremity vascular repair. All the excluded patients were 
    treated appropriately. A total of 92 consecutive patients who 
    fulfilled the inclusion criteria were initially entered into the 
    study. Three patients defaulted and were therefore excluded from 
    the study. Eighty-nine patients fulfilling the diagnostic criteria 
    for established open fracture of the tibia were used for this 
    study. They were those with open fractures of the tibia with or 
    without fibula involvement. The guidelines for the treatment of 
    these fractures were established prospectively and followed with 
    only minor alterations. These guidelines are as follows:
(i) All open tibia fractures were treated as surgical 
    emergencies.
(ii) Wound swabs were obtained before the commencement of 
    antibiotics and when there was established suppuration.
(iii) Plain films were taken of the affected bones after 
    temporary splintage application.
(iv) Anti tetanus prophylaxis as well as Ampicillin, Cloxacillin 
    and Gentamicin were given in divided doses for 72 hours to cover a 
    broad spectrum of micro-organisms.
(v) Thorough wound débridement and copious irrigation was 
    emphasised.
(vi) Wounds that were made clean by surgical débridement were 
    closed primarily. Dirty wounds were closed by delayed primary wound 
    closure once they were made clean following subsequent wound 
    debridement and irrigation.
(vii) The wound classification system of Gustilo and Anderson 
    was used (8).
(viii) Throughout this study, the commonest methods of fracture 
    stabilisation employed were above the knee Plaster of Paris cast 
    and external fixator.
The outcome of treatment was analysed in respect to the speed of 
    fracture union and presence of complications. Fracture union was 
    evaluated by clinical and radiological examinations at six weeks, 
    three months, and subsequently at monthly intervals. The fracture 
    is considered united if there is no pain, tenderness or abnormal 
    movement at the fracture site and bridging callus is visible on 
    radiograph. Delayed union was diagnosed when the fracture unites 
    between four and six months, while non-union was diagnosed when 
    union has not occurred after eight months of treatment. Each 
    patient was followed up for at least twelve months.
Data Analysis
The results of this study were analysed by descriptive 
    statistical methods, such as means and standard deviations. The 
    choice between parametric and non-parametric methods was dependent 
    on the frequency distribution of the data that was analysed. 
    Statistical analysis was done using the SPSS (statistical package 
    for the social sciences) software, release 11.0 ANOVA and 
    Pearson's Correlation were used as appropriate. Significant 
    difference was implied when P is <0.05.
Results
A total of 92 patients who fulfilled the inclusion criteria were 
    initially entered into the study. Three patients were lost to 
    follow-up. Eighty-nine patients with open tibia fractures were 
    successfully followed up. The age range was between 4 and 80 years. 
    The mean (+ SD) was 32.7 + 17.1 years. There were 5 
    7(64%) males (M) and 3 
    2(36%) females (F). That is a M:F 
    ratio of 1.8:1. Table 1 shows the various occupations of the 
    patients. Traders 28(31.5%) 
    cases and students 23(25.8%) 
    cases were the most common groups affected. Table 2 shows the 
    different causes of trauma in the patients studied. Motor vehicular 
    accident 54(60.7%) cases was 
    the leading cause of open fractures of the tibia.
The characteristics of the open tibia fractures show that there 
    was no difference in the side of the limb affected. In the right 
    tibia, open fracture occurred in 4 
    7(52.8%) cases, while in the left tibia it occurred 
    in 4 2(47.2%) cases as shown 
    in table 3.1. The most common type of fracture pattern on 
    radiograph was comminuted 3 
    6(40.4%) cases, while the least was segmental 
    3(3.4%) cases as shown in 
    table 3.2. The distal third was observed to be the most 
    common site for open tibia fractures 4 
    4(49.4%) cases. While the 
    least involved site was the proximal third 1 
    6(18%) cases as shown in table 
    2.3. In the Gustilo-Anderson grading of open tibia 
    fractures, types II and I were the most frequent 3 
    2(36%) cases and 2 
    2(24.7%) cases 
    respectively.
Wound debridement was carried out in all the patients' 8 
    9(100%) cases. Sequestrectomy and 
    partial fibulectomy were carried out in 1 
    0(11.2%) cases each. Skin grafting was carried out 
    in 7(7.9%) cases. 
    Fasciotomy, and bone grafting were the least common procedures 
    employed in this series 3(3.4%) cases each. Partial fibulectomy was done in open tibia 
    fractures with intact fibula. Skeletal stabilisation was done using 
    above knee Plaster of Paris (POP) cast in 69 (77.5%) cases. 
    Out of these 69 cases with above knee POP, 12(13.5%) cases had fracture redisplacement that was 
    treated with remanipulation. External fixator device was used in 2 
    0(22.5%) cases. The average 
    bone union time was 16.9 ± 7.6 weeks, range 6-36 
    weeks. The average follow-up period was 15.7 ± 3.7 
    months, range 4-30 months. The average distance from the accident 
    scene to the hospital was 33.2 ± 50.2 kilometres, 
    range 1 - 250 kilometres. The average duration between the time of 
    injury to the time of wound debridement was 6.0 ± 5.9 
    hours, range 1-48 hours. The average duration of hospital stay was 
    8.3 ± 6.3 weeks, range 6-36 weeks.
Gram positive cocci and gram negative rods were isolated. On the 
    whole Staphylococcus aureus 1 
    9(54.3%) cases and coagulase negative Staphylococcus 
    (CONS) 1 5(42.9%) cases were 
    the most common organisms isolated. The most common gram negative 
    rods that were isolated from the patients were Pseudomonas 
    aeruginosa 1 0(28.6%) cases, 
    Klebsislla aerogenes 8(22.9%) and Proteus mirabilis 7(20%) 
    cases. Multiple organisms were commonly isolated from the wounds. 
    All the organisms isolated were very sensitive to Gentamicin, 
    Cloxacillin and Ofloxacin. The sensitivity ranged from 70.5% 
    to 100%. While most of the organisms were resistant to Penicillin, 
    Ampicillin and Tetracycline. Coagulase negative Staphylococcus 
    (CONS) showed sensitivity to a wide range of antibiotics.
There was Correlation between the presence of wound infection 
    and (i) Gustilo and Anderson grading (F -.352, P .001); (ii) Injury to Debridement time in hours (F -.304, P 
    .004); (iii) Osteomyelitis (F .397, P .001); 
    (iv) Delayed union (F .253, P .017); (v) Union time 
    in weeks (F -.350, P .001). There was also 
    correlation between the following: (i) Injury to Débridement time 
    in hours and the distance from the accident scene to the hospital 
    (F .464, P .001); (ii) The fracture pattern and the 
    union time in weeks (F .353, P .001); and (iii) The 
    presence of osteomyelities 
    and delayed union (F .382, P .001). The observed 
    complications are shown in 
    table3. Wound infection was observed in 3 
    5(39.3%) cases. This was 
    followed by delayed union in 3 
    0(33.7%) cases. The complications grouped as others 
    1 0(11.2%) cases, were due 
    to wasting of the quadriceps, oedema and ankle stiffness. These 
    were controlled with limb elevation, the use of elastic bandage and 
    by active exercises
Discussion
Patients between 20 years and 50 years of age constituted 70% of 
    the cases. This is probably because they are the active productive 
    age group within the society. At the extremes of age (that is less 
    than 10 years and greater than 60 years), open tibia fractures were 
    observed to be uncommon (18% of the cases). This is presumably due 
    to the fact that people in this age group tend to travel less. 
    Males (M) were more affected than females (F). The ratio was M:F 
    1.8:1 in this study. Motor vehicular accidents accounted for 
    about 61% of the cases. This is the most common means of 
    inter-state and inter-city transportation. However, it was noted 
    that in patients less than 10 years, pedestrian crossing a busy 
    road unaided was to 20(22.5%) cases that had the application of the external fixator 
    device. The Plaster of Paris cast often makes access to the wound 
    difficult for inspection and dressing. Window made on the Plaster 
    of Paris cast often weakens the cast and this is often compounded 
    by the wet dressing fluid and wound discharges (4,19). These are 
    major problems of the Plaster of Paris cast treatment of severe 
    open tibia fractures especially in the Gustilo and Anderson type 
    III 1,14,15 
    . the most common cause of open tibia 
    fractures.
