AN IMPROVED SOLAR CABINET DRYER WITH NATURAL CONVECTIVE 
    HEAT TRANSFER
INTRODUCTION
Solar energy is fast becoming an alternative source of energy 
    because of the high rate of depletion of the conventional energy 
    sources like thermal, chemical, and petroleum energy. The quest to 
    utilize the cheap and readily available solar energy and also to 
    overcome the shortcomings of open sun drying process brought about 
    the development of solar drying system to improve upon the existing 
    food and agricultural products preservation techniques.
Dehydration or drying is a simple and low cost way to preserve 
    crops that might otherwise spoil. Drying of food crops is an energy 
    intensive operation. High prices and shortages in fossil fuel 
    increase the emphasis on using solar energy as an alternative 
    source of energy. In non-industrialized tropical countries, like 
    Nigeria, where sunlight is abundant, natural sun drying is one of 
    the commonest methods of drying. Drying is generally carried out by 
    direct exposure of the food crop to solar radiation in order to 
    reduce moisture and thereby reducing weight; drying preserves 
    nutritional quality of food; reduces the risk of contamination by 
    toxic mould and disease carrying insects. The use of solar energy 
    to dry crops is nothing new in tropics as many edible and even cash 
    crops such as cocoa and coffee beans have traditionally been dried 
    on racks placed in the sun. Although the traditional sun drying 
    process is common and widely embraced by all, however, the process 
    is slow and sometimes incomplete under unfavourable climatic 
    condition. Often, the drying products are subjected to noxious 
    effects of dust, dirt and insect infestation. As a result of 
    inadequacies of the open sun drying process, research effort on 
    drying agricultural produce have been on the increase over the 
    years in order to develop and produce an economical, effective and 
    systemized method of drying (Wilson, 1977).
Bamiro (1983) proposed a new formula for determination of solar 
    radiation that was shown to give good agreement when applied to the 
    analysis of annual daity 
    insolation on a seasonal basis. The formula predicted a linear 
    relationship between the daily diffuse radiation and the daily 
    total radiation in line with the Liu and Jordan model but with the 
    diffuse component generally higher in qualitative agreement with 
    observations in the tropics. This study was particularized for 
    Ibadan, Nigeria. In the study by Fagbenle (1990), it was revealed 
    that total solar radiation increases with latitude in Nigeria but 
    the month of August experiences the least total solar radiation 
    throughout the country with values ranging between 12 and 20 
    MJ/m2-day depending on the location. In 
    another study, Fagbenle (1993) enumerated two methods used for 
    estimating total solar radiation and recommended maximum-likelihood 
    quadratic fit for use in Nigeria. It has been observed that the 
    solar intensity ranges from 550 to 1075 
    W/m2 with a total incident energy per 
    day of 17 to 25 MJ/m2 in llorin, Nigeria 
    of latitude 8.462oN (Lasode, 
    1999). The optimum collector tilt angle for sites in Nigeria with 
    latitude 8.5oN or less is 
    (latitude angle +10°) while for locations with latitudes greater 
    than 8.50 N is (latitude angle + 
    5o) (Fagbenle, 1991) 
The major drying parameters pertinent to bed drying method are 
    ; the temperature and relative 
    humidity of the drying air, its airflow rate and the depth of the 
    bed in the drying chamber. These are parameters that determine how 
    fast or slow drying will proceed inside the solar cabinet dryer 
    (Basunia and Abe, 2001). A lower relative humidity provides a 
    better drying potential. A high humidity inhibits the rate of 
    drying. The increase in the temperature of the drying air cause a 
    reduction of its relative humidity and thus increases its moisture 
    carrying capacity. The increase in air temperature increases the 
    temperature of the food products being dried and this in turn 
    causes the vapour pressure within the food crop to increase without 
    any change in vapour pressure of the drying air. A high vapour 
    pressure difference is thus set up which improves the drying 
    potential of the solar cabinet box. Hence, the hotter the air the 
    more moisture it will hold before becoming saturated.
The most important factor in any successful drying process is 
    the rate of airflow in and out of the dryer. A high velocity air, 
    in addition to taking moisture will also sweep it away from the 
    drying product's surface, thus preventing moisture from 
    creating a saturated atmosphere, is strictly needed in natural 
    convective heat flow drying processes. In designing any natural 
    convection drying system great emphasis is placed on the depth of 
    bed in the drying chamber since no external airflow delivery 
    mechanism is involved. This is to allow for the static pressure 
    head developed by a given airflow delivery to overcome the 
    resistance offered by the bed so that air flow could occur. A 
    proper bed depth ensures that there is no pressure drop across the 
    bed and that enough air flows over the food crop on the bed in the 
    drying chamber of the solar cabinet dryer (Basunia and Abe, 
    2001).
Lasode (1999) designed solar dryer with collector that could 
    transmit 125W7m2 thermal power to the 
    drying air. The dryer could raise the temperature of ambient air 
    from 30oC to 
    45oC and reduce relative humidity from 
    80% to 34%. Tests later carried out on the dryer revealed that at 
    the early stage of drying, the samples in the open sun dried faster 
    than that in the solar dryer, but at the later stage, the rate of 
    drying in the solar hot box became better than the open sun. On the 
    overall, the samples in the solar dryer show no sign of mould 
    formation, lighter colour, and better taste compared with that of 
    open sun.
The focus of this work is to improve on the study of Lasode 
    (1999) by increasing the depth of the bed in the drying chamber, 
    improving the air flow rate by providing adequate ventilation and 
    increasing the thermal power of the drying air. The variables and 
    mechanisms involved in improving the dehydration processes, and the 
    design parameters and considerations involved in the construction 
    of this solar cabinet dryer are detailed.
PSYCHROMETRY AND 
    DRYING PROCESS
Consider the ambient air at TA = 
    27oC and of relative humidity (R.H) ΦA = 70% at the location -ILORIN, 
    8.462oN Nigeria. From the IHVE 
    psychrometric chart (see 
    Figure 1), if the dryer is to heat air to a temperature, 
    TB = 53oC, the 
    relative humidity of the air would reduce to about 
    ΦB =16%. if 
    moisture is removed from blanched yam of 60% moisture content (wet 
    basis) with this heated air until an equilibrium relative humidity 
    of Φc = 80% is attained then the temperature 
    of the drying air will be reduced to Tc = 
    32.5oC.
Drying with heated air at constant rate is a constant wet bulb 
    process described by path B to C in Figure 1. The absolute humidity 
    changes from 0.016 to 0.0254. The change in the 
    humidity ratio of heated air ΔWH is thus,
ΔWH = 0.0254-0.016 = 0.0094
that is, every kilogram of dry air entering the dryer will pick 
    up 0.0094 kg of water.
The drying path for unheated air is described by AD, its 
    corresponding humidity ratio change is then 
    ΔWC = 0.0007.
By implication, the capability of the heated air for dehydration 
    is nearly fourteen times greater than ambient or unheated air. The 
    amount of energy absorbed by the air when being heated from state 
    point A to B is calculated as the difference in enthalpy 
    (hB- hA) between the 
    two points, Δh= hB- 
    hA =98.5 - 69= 29.5 KJ/ kg. 
    This is the quantity of thermal energy needed for dehydration from 
    point B toC.
For the drying process, the energy balance equation is 
    ; 
where MR is the mass of water evaporated 
    from the drying sample and absorbed by the drying air of mass 
    MA; TB and 
    Tc are the initial and the final temperature 
    of the drying air respectively 
    ; CA is the specific heat capacity 
    of air while L=2.4MJ/kg is the latent heat of vapourization 
    for free water at 32oC.
DESIGN CONSIDERATION
In designing a solar cabinet drying system the following point 
    are considered;
(a) Amount of moisture to be removed 
    MR from a given quantity of crop to bring 
    the moisture content to a storage level in a specified time which 
    is calculated from the equation below - 
where MI is the initial mass of the 
    drying sample, mF and 
    m0 are the final and initial moisture 
    content for storage on percent (%)-wet basis respectively.
(b) Total drying time: This is the daily 
    sunshine hours for which drying will take place. The annual average 
    daily useful sunshine hour in llorin, Nigeria is 6.208hr. 
    [DMS, 1985-86]. Thus, the average drying rate 
    DR; 
    
t is the total drying time required to remove 
    MR (kg) of water from the wet produce. 
    Average drying rate is determined from the ratio of mass of 
    moisture to be removed by solar heat and drying time.
(c) Quantity of air needed for drying.
The quantity of air needed for drying can be calculated either 
    from the energy balance equation (1) or by using 
    psychrometric chart 
    , The problem in designing a solar 
    dryer is to determine a suitable initial temperature 
    TA i.e. the temperature of the 
    drying air before passing through the bed and the correct quantity 
    of air mass o air 
    MA necessary to remove a specified amount of 
    moisture MR from the wet produce. The volume 
    flow rate of air required for drying, QA is 
    given by, (Basunia and Abe, 2001) as 
where;
QA is the volume flow rate of air 
    required for drying m3/s and p represent 
    the density of air 1.21 kg/m3. 
    Mass, MA of air required to remove 
    MR kg of water is calculated thus; 
    
(d) Daily Solar Insolation and the useful energy 
    needed by the solar cabinet dryer.
This is considered in order to determine the useful energy to be 
    received by the dryer and also to determine the area of the solar 
    collector that is needed to trap such energy. A south facing tilted 
    collector when compared to other orientations gives maximum daily 
    solar energy collection in the northern latitudes (it is the exact 
    opposite in southern latitudes where it must be north-facing). The 
    optimum tilt angle is made equal to the latitude of the 
    location-ILORIN, in order to optimize solar collection by the 
    collector following Sayigh (1980). The solar energy collected on a 
    tilted surface is obtained by multiplying the horizontal solar 
    radiation with the tilt factor rb. The tilt 
    factor is the ratio of the beam radiation flux falling on a tilted 
    surface to that falling on a horizontal surface.
Consider a tilted surface facing south i.e. when Ϋ 
    (Surface azimuth angle) =0

where;
δ -angle of declination; θ -angle between an incident beam of 
    flux, and the normal to the plane
σ -latitude; β- the slope; ŵ- the hour angle;
Ϋ -Surface azimuth angle and θ2 -angle of 
    incident on a horizontal surface
The average monthly rb factor ranged from 
    1.30 in October to 1.5 in November (Basunia and Abe, 
    2001).
Hence, total useful energy Eu , in kJ 
    needed to evaporate moisture is calculated from the equation below 
    ;

where
AC is the area of the collector, 
    m2 needed to trap energy 
    Eu
I is the total global radiation on the horizontal surface, 
    kJ/m2
n is the efficiency of the collector Note: 
    I also represent the total incident energy per day, the value that 
    ranges between 17 and 25 MJ/ m2 for 
    llorin, Nigeria.

(e) Air Pressure Head
A pressure drop causes the convection of air through the sample 
    bed resulting from the difference between density of relatively 
    cool ambient air and the warm air inside the dryer. The density 
    difference Δp is calculated from the ideal gas law 
    ;

where
P = Atmospheric pressure = 1.01x105N/m2
R = Air gas constant = 287 J/kg K
Thus the corresponding pressure difference as a result of 
    natural convection is determined from equation (10) 
    ;

H is the height, in m of the hot air column from the base of 
    dryer to the point of air discharge from the dryer while g is the 
    acceleration due to the gravity.
(f) Air flow Velocity
Airflow velocity Vw is proportional to 
    the pressure gradient as observed in natural convection heat 
    transfer.

where S = 0.32 m4/N.min is a 
    constant which indicate the resistance offered by the sample to air 
    flow; X represents the depth, in m of the food bed in the drying 
    chamber and Vw is in m/min (Ayensu, 
    1987).
(g) Thermal power (collector heat flux) 
    Jc in kW/m2

The collector efficiency is the ratio of the thermal power 
    generated by the solar collector to the daily average solar heat 
    flux intercepted by area of the collector. It is calculated as 
    indicated below;

where F7 =550W/m2 is the average 
    daily solar flux intercepted by the collector in llorin during the 
    test period. The natural convection coefficient for heat transfer 
    for the collector is calculated to be 16.29 
    Wm2/Kfrom Equation (14).

The design calculation is based on the climatic condition of the 
    location, llorin, Nigeria of latitude 8.462oN [DIMS, 1985-86}. The annual 
    average air temperature TA of the location 
    for design of the dryer is obtained from averaging the average 
    annual minimum and maximum temperatures of 21.4oC and 32.1oC to obtain 
    TA = 27oC 
    


CONSTRUCTION OF THE SOLAR DRYER
Figure 2 shows the schematic diagram of the prototype of the 
    solar cabinet dryer constructed for experimental test. The 
    configuration of the design is such as to produce a good air draft, 
    improvement on the absorbent properties and increasing the solar 
    collector area. The construction is made from locally available 
    materials thus making it well suitable for domestic manufacture. 
    The solar cabinet dryer consists of rock storage system, drying 
    chamber, air intake and discharge vents and the glass collector.
The solar collector which admit insolation (sunlight) and limit 
    heat loss in the hot box is constructed using a double layer 
    transparent glass sheet of transmittance > 0.7, thermal 
    conductivity k = 0.6W7moK for 
    wavelengths in the range 0.2-2.0μm and opaque to 
    wavelength greater than 4.5μm. Although any transparent 
    object can be used as collector for this type of drying system, 
    however, glass was chosen because of its excellent transmittance 
    and weathering resistance. The two side panels were made of double 
    layer transparent glass, which provides additional heating and 
    concentrate heat into the drying chamber and also serve as an 
    inspection port for monitoring temperature and relative humidity 
    during experimental test.
