URBAN AND RURAL ELECTRIFICATION: ENHANCING THE ENERGY 
    SECTOR IN NIGERIA USING PHOTOVOLTAIC TECHNOLOGY
INTRODUCTION
Electric power is the most widely used form of power, for 
    virtually all modern technologies, which is enjoyed by the majority 
    of people living in the industrialized countries.
The situation is quite different in the developing countries 
    where the cost of establishment of centralized power generating and 
    distribution facilities is too high. Incessant power outage, 
    constant power shading due to excess loads on the national grid 
    lines are the order of the day and the result is that most people 
    have not been supplied with electricity.
Nigeria is endowed with an annual average daily sunshine 
    (measured with Campbell Stokes recorder) of 6.25 hours, 
    ranging between about 3.5 hours at the coastal areas and 
    9.0 hours at the far northern boundary. Similarly, it has an 
    annual average daily solar radiation of about 5.25 
    kWh/m2/ day, varying from 3.5 
    kWh/m2/day at the coastal areas and 
    7.0 kWh/m2/day at the northern 
    boundary. Nigeria receives about 4.851x1012kWh of energy per 
    day from the sun (Ojosu, 1990, Chineke, 2002a). This is equivalent 
    to about 1.082 million 
    tones of oil equivalent (mtoe) per day. In an analysis by 
    Akinbanmi (1997), the following estimate was arrived at
    ; that by year 1989, Nigeria’s oil 
    reserve is expected to have reached 20 billion barrels and 
    production should have also increased from 1.89 million 
    barrels per day (mbpd) to 2.5 mbpd. This implies that the 
    reserve/production ratio or the depletion time of Nigeria’s crude 
    oil, if there is no further efforts to increase the reserve and if 
    the production still remains at the expected 1989 level, may be 
    within the next 25-30 years. Presently, the natural gas reserve 
    stands at 106 trillion cubic feet (tcf) (about 178 billion barrels 
    of oil equivalent) the depletion time of Nigeria’s natural gas may 
    be in the next 180 years. Coal is abundant in Nigeria and estimate 
    of reserves in over 2.75 billion tones of which the 
    depletion time is to be 1,278 years from now (Chineke, 2002a).
Solar electric power provides energy independence, economic 
    value and environmental security. Solar electric (photovoltaic PV) 
    modules have the potential to supply a significant portion of the 
    industrialized and developing 
    countries electric energy requirements. PV is however, 
    already accepted in many applications, and is being applied in 
    electrification projects. PV is still a relatively “young” 
    industry. Total world wide manufacturing capacity is less than that 
    of a medium capacity turbo generator. The technology is at an 
    advanced stage and requires higher penetration rates to increase 
    manufacturing volumes and decrease costs. Applications of PV 
    technology range from small stand-alone systems to mega Watt scale 
    fully integrated utility interconnected systems. PV and other 
    renewable distributed resources are considered as some of the best 
    technology for electrification in developing countries, especially 
    where the costs of electrification (distribution and control 
    systems) exceed the benefits to sparsely populated areas with small 
    users, and do not provide a return on investment to utilities. The 
    most promising renewable energy technology is photovoltaic, which 
    provides electricity on site, directly from the sun without concern 
    for energy supply or environmental harm. These solid-state devices 
    simply make electricity out of sunlight silently with no 
    maintenance, no pollution, and no depletion of materials. It is 
    hoped that within the next few years, solar PV power will be 
    competitive and probably the most preferred energy source 
    http:// www.homepower.com/ . These advances 
    in photovoltaic technology including the development of thin film 
    devices hold the key to new power supply systems, which could speed 
    up rural electrification in developing countries.
The study was undertaken to present ways of helping out in the 
    Urban and rural electrification programme in Nigeria, one way of 
    which is by using photovoltaic technology. Presently, the electric 
    power supply from our local power generating stations, which are 
    oversubscribed is epileptic which flags the country’s development 
    and that of West Africa.
THE ENERGY SCENARIO IN NIGERIA
Nigeria has solely depended on non-renewable sources for power 
    generation for the electricity used in the country (Ajayi, 1998). 
    It is quite clear that there is need to enhance the energy sector 
    with a reliable renewable source like the photovoltaic cell, which 
    generates its electricity from the sun. To alleviate the growing 
    need for power in rural households not connected to grid 
    electricity in Nigeria, Adeoti et al (2001) assessed the domestic 
    load demand of rural areas which will serve as input data in the 
    design of photovoltaic-based rural home electrification systems, 
    and also assist governments in their rural electrification planning 
    framework. Their work showed that rural households in Nigeria will 
    require 2324.5 Wh/day or 850.8 kWh/yr in order to 
    meet their basic power requirements for such loads as lighting and 
    electronic appliances radios and televisions. Nigeria’s electricity 
    sub-sector is being operated solely by the Power Holding Company of 
    Nigeria (PHCN), which was formed in 1973 on a grid system. The 
    Company, recognized by law, distributes power to rural, urban and 
    semi-urban dwellers in Nigeria.
As of 1999, the national grid has eight generating stations 
    (Kasali, 1999), 28 major power transmitting stations and 45 
    distributing districts with a total installed generating capacity 
    of 5888 MW and an effective installed capacity of 5412 MW which is 
    made up of plants which are over 30 years old (Okoro, 1999). The 
    average MW capability is about 3355.40 MW, while the average 
    MW availability is 2515.18 MW representing 0.4272 
    capacity availability factor (Kasali, 1999; Okoro, 1999). The 
    highest peak demand so far experienced, according to a 1999 report 
    in the country, was given as 2470 MW, but the consumer still 
    experiences load shedding because of out of the average MW 
    availability, and there are substations, transmission and other 
    losses to account for, including the suppressed load of about 600 
    MW. Currently, available electric energy has been as low as 1800 
    MW, giving way for increased power rationing and brown-outs. With 
    this scenario, rural and urban development is being hampered 
    leading to increasing poverty in the society, rural-to-urban 
    migration, youth restiveness and other associated ills. Boosting 
    the energy sector will help to improve the living standard of the 
    people and kick-start the country’s development. Definitely, solar 
    photovoltaic technology is a sure and viable option.
GOVERNMENT INITIATED SOLAR SYSTEM PROJECTS IN JIGAWA STATE 
    OF NIGERIA
In 2001 several bodies and organization like solar Electric 
    Light Fund (SELF), an NGO based in USA, and Jigawa state Government 
    initiated a proposal to bring solar generated electricity (PV) to 
    power essential services in 3 villages of Jigawa state. The project 
    information are as presented below.
1. Community water Pumping. The powerful solarpowered pumps 
    supplied with this project are designed to run maintenance free for 
    eight to ten years. It is currently supplying the village with 
    clean, fresh water.
2. Village Health Clinics: Solar lights enable health workers to 
    see patients at night for the first time; vaccine refrigerators 
    allow more effective vaccination programs and fans increase patient 
    comfort.
3. Village Schools Illuminated classrooms are allowing adult 
    education classrooms for the first time and a place for children to 
    work on their lessons. The head master has received computers and 
    computer training.
4. Streetlights: In a hot climate where people enjoy the cool of 
    the evening, lights provide safe gathering places for socializing 
    and commerce. Ten to twelve lights were installed in each 
    village.
5. Mosque Lighting, Lighting makes 
    nighttime activities possible and a public address system 
    facilitates the call to prayer.
6. Micro-enterprise centers: the centers have been constructed 
    to provide electricity to 6 very small businesses in each village. 
    The shared PV systems, much less expensive than individual systems 
    for each shop increase productivity and income for tailors, 
    barbers, electronic repairmen and other businesses.
7. Home Lighting Systems: Approximately 20 home lighting systems 
    were installed in each village to demonstrate lighting that is 
    better, safer and no more costly than the kerosene lamps they 
    replace.
8. Mobile Solar Irrigation pumps: In the one project village 
    that has a year-round source of surface water efficient 
    solar-powered pumps helps the poorest farmers grow crops during the 
    dry season to provide a critical inflow of food and cash into the 
    village.
9. Groundnut Oil Expeller: The making and selling of groundnut 
    oil is one of the few sources of income for village women. A 
    solar-powered expeller installed in one project village saves time 
    and labour while earning more income for women.
This project is now fully operational and is demonstrating the 
    transforming effect that a sustainable source of electricity has on 
    village life in the areas of health, education, water supply 
    security and economic development.
COST COMPARISON BETWEEN PV SYSTEM AND DIESEL 
    ENGINE
The cost of electrical materials for 1989 and 1996 analysis 
    indicates an increase of about 400% in the local cost between 1989 
    and 1996. The inflationary trend drastically reduced the purchasing 
    power of the rural population, whose present average annual income 
    fell to less than US$360 and US$600 for low and middle-income 
    earners respectively. The effect of this on the rural electricity 
    grid supply was to render it impracticable. In addition, the use of 
    diesel generates in the rural area presents problem, such as 
    inadequate fuel supply, and a lack of service parts and of regular 
    technical assistance (Adurodija et al, 1998). The African Credit 
    Development Company Limited urged government to adopt PV or an 
    alternative source of energy because it would reduce significantly 
    the cost of GSM charges. Alluding to MTN-one of Nigeria’s mobile 
    phone operations GSM operators spend over US$3732 on generators in 
    each of their base stations roughly 520 – with cost being 
    transferred to subscribers in 
    terns of billing (Ita, 2005). Photovoltaic systems were 
    once environmentally appealing but prohibitively expensive 
    solutions to energy needs. Over the past 20 year, however, there 
    has been a 10-fold reduction in the delivered price of energy from 
    PV system, to current costs as low as US$4-5 per peak watt (Wp) and 
    US$0.25-0.35/kWh. Small home – systems in developing 
    nations typically supply 10-80 Wp costing US$ 10/Wp or more to 
    install with US$ 1.00/kWp or more a representative operating 
    cost. While this is still well above the costs of power from 
    fossil-fuel plants, which in areas of optimal demand and fuel cost 
    can reach 3-4 cents/KWh, there are reasons to be hopeful. The price 
    of PV modules has decreased by roughly 20% for each doubling of the 
    number of units produced as can be seen in Table 1.
Investment in research and continuing support for pre economic 
    pilot projects as a means to spur new markets both contribute to 
    further decreases in cost and improvements in the technology. 
    Beyond that, PV is a “flexible” technology where systems of many 
    sizes can be easily constructed and very cheaply maintained to meet 
    a range of power demands. PV systems have of course always been 
    appealing where rural electrification by grid extension is 
    prohibitively expensive or physically impractical. To see this, 
    compare PV to the two traditional means to provide electricity: 
    connection to local diesel or petroleum generator; or extension of 
    a national or regional grid both of these can be expensive, and at 
    times, unreliable.
Private, diesel based mini-grids in developing nations often 
    charge over US$ 1/kWh for access (Foly, 1995). At the same time, 
    grid extension in rural area of development  
    nations may exceed US$ 10,000/km, which if coupled with low daily 
    load factors makes rural electricity services very expensive. In 
    fact, when monthly loads are 10-15 kWh as can be the case in newly 
    electrified areas, or in particularly poor districts this source of 
    electricity is no cheaper than PV power is today. The estimated 
    construction cost of a stand-alone PV system in Nigeria is shown in 
    the Table 2.
