DEVELOPMENT AND EVALUATION OF A THRESHING MACHINE FOR 
    PROSOPIS AFRICANA SEED
ABSTRACT
A decorticating machine for Prosopis africana was 
    developed, tested and evaluated. Prosopis africana is popular in 
    the Sub-Saharan Africa, with all the parts of the tree useful for 
    medicinal purposes. This study focuses on the threshing of the pod 
    to obtain the seed, which is the most widely used of the parts of 
    the Prosopis africana tree. Results from preliminary investigations 
    carried out of on some physical and engineering properties of the 
    pod and seed were used in the design of a threshing machine. The 
    machine was tested with pods at a moisture content of 8% w.b. using speeds of 300, 350, 400 and 450rpm at four feed 
    rates of 1, 2, 3 and 4kglmin. The threshing efficiency (TE), 
    cleaning efficiency (CE) and seed loss (SL) increased as the drum 
    speed increased. There was however no significant difference in the 
    variations of the values of TE, CE and SL at different feed rates 
    but the TE and CE decreased with increase in feed rate. The maximum 
    threshing and cleaning efficiencies were obtained at a speed of 450 
    rpm as 95.8% and 96.0% respectively at a feed rate of 
    1 and 4 Kg/min. The highest seed loss (19.1%) was obtained 
    at a drum speed of 450rpm and feed rate of 4Kglmin. The high 
    threshing and cleaning efficiencies obtained in the threshing of 
    Prosopis Africana and minimal loss have shown that there is a 
    prospect in the mechanization of the processing and handling 
    operation hence commercialization and promotion of mechanized 
    threshing at a large scale.
INTRODUCTION
Prosopis africana has been known to be 
    important to mankind especially in the sub-saharan Africa. Its 
    origin, cultivation and importance have been highlighted and 
    presented in a number of research reports. They observed that all 
    the parts of the tree are used for one purpose or the other. These 
    ranged from the use of the stem, leaves and the bark for medicinal 
    purposes (Oyeyiola, 1999) and the seeds fermented or processed in 
    various ways as food condiments (Omafuvbe et. 
    al., 1999) and raw materials in the livestock 
    industry because of its rich protein content (Barminas 
    et. al., 1998; Vickery and 
    Vickery, 1979; FAO, 2003)
The utilization of these plants and their importance calls for 
    methods that will process them with ease. However very little has 
    been published on the processing and handling of the component 
    parts of the crop under study, the few publications available 
    describe the specie, without 
    highlighting the properties that may be of engineering 
    importance.
The pods of Prosopis africana are hard, shiny 
    dark brown, cylindrical (up to 15cm long and 3cm in diameter) with 
    thick woody compartmented walls. There are about 10 loose, rattling 
    seeds per pod with a thin, inter-marginal line around. In order to 
    process the seed for its various uses it should be extracted from 
    the pod. Decorticating and shelling are processes of extracting the 
    useful part to enhance further processing, reduce the volume and 
    hence the transport and handling cost (Asiedu 1989).
The process of extraction of the seeds of Prosopis 
    africana seeds has always been and still done manually by 
    breaking the pods on a platform using stone or stick to hit the 
    bulk crop (Figure 1). The hard pods of Prosopis 
    africana are crushed to extract the seeds out among the 
    Tiv and Idoma speaking areas in the Middle Belt of Nigeria by 
    hitting and crushing the pods using two stones, or a hammer and a 
    hard surface. Another method is by putting the pods in a mortar and 
    using a pestle to crush it. After crushing, the fibrous pod pulp is 
    separated from the seeds. This is a tedious task that is time and 
    energy consuming, and also hazardous. There is no published report 
    on the use of any available threshing or decorticating machine 
    either for the crop or the use of those for other bean seeds.

The processing of Prosopis africana seeds 
    into food condiments involves boiling the seeds in water for 10 - 
    12 hours and splitting the seed coat to release the cotyledons. The 
    cotyledons are then washed with water and further boiled for 2 
    hours. The cooked cotyledons are allowed to cool, then wrapped (in 
    50 - 80g per group) in layers of clean leaves and fermented 
    (Omafuvbe et. al.., 1999).
Threshing is the separation of grains or seeds from the straw or 
    pods of harvested crop. Threshing may be accomplished by impact of 
    a fast moving member upon the material, rubbing, squeezing or a 
    combination of two or more of centrifugal, crushing and shear 
    forces. A Thresher is commonly made of a rotating drum with or 
    without rasp bars or screw within a cylinder or concave and a 
    pneumatic separation unit using a blower or aspirator.
The process of threshing involves the interaction of machine and 
    crop for the release of grains from the ear. A number of works has 
    been done and reported on threshers and the parameters that affect 
    threshing are grouped into two; machine parameters and crop 
    parameters. The crop parameters are moisture content, strength, 
    shape and size, density and specific gravity of the seed and pod, 
    and variety of the crop while the machine parameters are: drum 
    speed, cylinder-concave clearance, feed rate and fan capacity.
Information on the design and operation of the decorticating 
    machine for other bean seeds indicated that the moisture content of 
    grain is one of the major physical factors that affect the 
    mechanical damage to grains and the threshing efficiency of 
    machines. The effect of moisture content on hardness and strength 
    of several grains indicates that greater energy is required to 
    break grains having higher moisture content by impact compared to 
    those having lower moisture content (Paulsen et 
    al., 1980). Simonyan and Oni (2001) reported that 
    there is an increase in threshing efficiency and extractor 
    efficiency with decrease in moisture content while Ajayi, (1991) 
    found that the moisture content of the crop influenced the material 
    capacity of a locust bean thresher.
Threshing effectiveness was also found to be affected by the 
    cylinder speed (Ajayi, 1991; Simonyan and Oni, 2001), the concave 
    clearance (Mandouh et al., 2000 for 
    wheat), feed rate of crops, the number of rows of concave teeth 
    used with spike tooth cylinder, and the type of crop (Yusuf and 
    Suleiman, 2000; Srivastavaet al., 1993; 
    Helmy, 1998). Increasing the speed reduces the cylinder loss, may 
    substantially increase damage with the susceptibility to damage 
    varying greatly among different crops. Kaul and Egbo (1985) stated 
    that an optimum speed is desirable to get an optimum performance of 
    a thresher as excessive speed can cause the grain to crack, and too 
    low a speed can give unthreshed heads. EI-Nono and Mohammed (2000) 
    on the other hand found that, for wheat, the machine power 
    requirement was directly proportional to the drum speed, moisture 
    content and grain damage.
Studies on the effect of swinging hammer, spike tooth and rasp 
    bas cylinders on threshing 
    effectiveness and damage of wheat revealed that the cylinder speed 
    and concave clearance were found to be important variable in 
    unthreshed grain and damage model. Increase in cylinder speed and 
    decrease in concave clearance decreased the rate or unthreshed 
    grain and increased grain damage and power requirement. They found 
    out that the swinging hammer type cylinder consumed more power than 
    the rasp bar and spike cylinders.
There has been very little report on the properties of 
    Prosopis africana pods and seeds, especially as 
    it may interest the engineer for the design of a machine for 
    threshing any crop that requires the application of the engineering 
    properties of the crop. Similarly information on other engineering 
    properties, such as the flow, aerodynamic and thermal properties 
    are not available. In order to aid the design of this machine, some 
    physical and engineering properties of Prosopis 
    africana were determined in the first part of this 
    paper.
There is no report published on the design development and 
    evaluation of a machine for decorticating Prosopis 
    africana seeds. With the availability of reports on the 
    properties of other similar crops and threshing, there is a need to 
    therefore use the data obtained from the preliminary studies to 
    design, develop and evaluate the performance of an appropriate 
    decorticating machine, which will reduce the drudgery associated 
    with the traditional methods of decorticating Prosopis 
    africana pods.
DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS, CONCEPTION AND SELECTION OF 
    PARAMETERS
Design Considerations
The following were considered in the design of the Machine: 
    ability to thresh Prosopis africana seeds 
    without damage at a rate higher than the manual method, ease of 
    operation, reduction of the power requirement and the drudgery 
    involved in the traditional methods of threshing, economy to make 
    the machine affordable and within the capacity of the local farmers 
    and the choice of materials for the development of the machine to 
    reduce the total power requirement.
The Component of the Machine
The machine shown in Figure 2 consists of a frame, the hopper, 
    threshing unit made of a spiked tooth threshing drum and a 
    perforated concave as well as winnowing section and the seed 
    outlet. The frame was made of angle iron of adequate thickness by 
    design (50mmx50mmx 5mm) for stability during operation. The drum 
    was made of mild steel sheet of thickness 3mm, rolled into a 
    cylindrical shape, with a solid shaft passing through the drum. 
    There are beaters arranged on the drum in four rows at 25mm apart. 
    The concave was perforated for the threshed seeds together with the 
    chaff to pass through onto a stream of air from a fan to blow off 
    the chaff. The clean seeds were collected at the seed outlet.

Selection of Parameters
Using the data obtained from literatures and the preliminary 
    investigations carried out on some physical and engineering 
    properties of the pod and seed by the following parameters were 
    selected for the design:
(i) Concave clearance of 20mm based on the average thickness of 
    the pods.
(ii) Concave perforations of 10mm being the average major 
    diameter of the seeds.
The following were obtained by design
(iii) Operating speed of 700 rpm
(iv) Dimensions of beaters 30mm x 40 x 5mm.
(v) Diameter of rolled drum = 180mm
(vi) Effective drum diameter of 180 + 2(40) = 260mm
The minimum desired threshing efficiency was 0.95 = 95% 
    
DESIGN CALCULATIONS.
The Threshing Drum.
The principal parameters of the threshing drum are the drum 
    length, the drum diameter, number of beaters on the drum and the 
    drum speed. (Soja et al., 2004). The drum 
    length was obtained from Equation 1 as reported by Kepner et al 
    (1978) and Resnikov (1991).

According to Resnikov (1991) the permissible feed rate of 
    threshers is 0.4 - 0.6kg/s, therefore for a q of 
    0.6 kg/s and q0 of 0.4 kg/s, 
    the drum length (l) for 4 rows of beater was 0.40m. 
    Operating the machine at a speed of 700rpm, the peripheral speed of 
    the drum was obtained as 9.52 m/s which falls between the 
    range recommended by Joshi (1981) being 8.17-13.67m/s.

Weight of drum and beaters using mild steel was obtained as 
    90.8N taken to be = 91N
The Drum Shaft
Assuming that the load due to the weight of the threshing drum 
    and beaters is uniformly distributed along the section of the shaft 
    and leaving an allowance of 10 mm between ends of drum and concave 
    (for free rotation of drum) on both sides of the drum and 150mm on 
    both sides for the frame and pulleys, a shaft length of 720mm was 
    obtained. Placing the pulleys weighing 14N (for prime mover) and 8N 
    (for fan) on both ends of the shaft as point loads, the shaft was 
    designed for bending, deflection and shear failure to obtain the 
    diameter from the relation
