LABORATORY MEASUREMENT OF THE ELECTRICAL RESISTIVITY OF 
    SOME NIGERIAN CRYSTALLINE BASEMENT COMPLEX ROCKS
INTRODUCTION
The main difficulty in the direct measurement of the electrical 
    resistivity of crystalline basement rocks is in making good 
    electrical contact with the rock outcrop. For this reason, the 
    resistivity is conventionally inferred from the interpretation of 
    sounding data where invariably the bedrock is overlain by regolith, 
    with the attendant loss of resolution due to suppression. The 
    resistivity of the substratum so determined can hardly be precise, 
    especially when the geoelectrical unit directly overlying it has a 
    very low resistivity. In many cases, a somewhat ambiguous and 
    ill-defined „infinite“ resistivity is then assigned to the bedrock 
    (Verma et al., 1980; Beeson and Jones, 1988; Olayinka, 1990; 
    Olorunfemi et al., 1991; Hazell et al., 1992). An 
    alternative approach is to measure the resistivity of the rock in 
    the laboratory.
In the present work, the electrical resistivity of some Pre- 
    Cambrian to Upper Cambrian crystalline basement rock units from 
    southwestern Nigeria, has been measured in the laboratory. The 
    relevant theory is due to Van der Pauw (1958) who derived an 
    analytic expression for the specific electrical resistivity of a 
    material bounded by a simply connected arbitrary shaped closed 
    curve containing no singularities. The expression is in terms of 
    currents and potential differences measured at the boundary of the 
    curve. Four electrodes are used and the rock specimens do not have 
    to take any regular shape, although a uniform thickness must be 
    ensured. Electrical contact is made with the sample by injecting 
    the filter tip of the electrode with 0.1 molar potassium 
    chloride solution.
The resistivity of 102 rock samples comprising quartzites, 
    gneisses, charnockite, amphibolite, biotite granite and 
    granodiorite from 5 locations in southwestern Nigeria, was 
    measured. The results show that, in general, the basement rocks 
    have very high resistivities, ranging from 1.01 * 
    103 to 2.82 * 
    106 ohm-m. The gneisses have the lowest 
    resistivities; followed by banded gneiss; augen gneiss; biotite 
    granite; charnockite; granodiorite; amphibolite; while quartzite 
    has the highest.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
Determination of the specific resistivity of samples with 
    arbitrary shapes requires measurement of the potentials and current 
    flows at the boundary of the samples. To carry out this, contacts 
    with the samples must be at the circumference and must have areas 
    that are small compared with the surface area of the sample. This 
    condition is met by the use of special electrochemical electrodes 
    employing silver and chloride ions. Moreover, the sample must have 
    uniform thickness and should not contain any isolated holes. This 
    condition is fulfilled by slicing the sample twice, the first cut 
    being to create a reference surface and the second to complete the 
    slice.
If 1, 2, 3, 4 are small cyclic contacts at the circumference of 
    the arbitrarily shaped uniform thick slice, the following 
    resistances can be defined :

where V, I denote the potential at and the current through the 
    specified nodes or branches, respectively.
R12,34 = R34,12 
    and R23,41 = R41,23 
    by the reciprocity relation derivable from Telegen’s theorem for a 
    two-port electrical network (Agunloye and Hussain, 1982).
Van der Pauw (1958) has shown that the specific resistivity of a 
    specimen under the above condition is 
    :

where X = natural logarithm of 2.0; d = thickness of the 
    sample and f is a function of ε given by

The electrical measuring system (Fig. 1) consists of a 
    current source, current adjuster, selector, data precision model 
    1350 digital multi-meter and four non-polarisable silver-silver 
    chloride electrodes. A sheet of fine silver mesh, 30 * 20 mm, is 
    cut, with any dirts on its surface removed using emery. A solution 
    of 1 molar HCl is prepared and the silver mesh dropped into it. 
    This is left for seven days after which a proper and permanent 
    coated sheet is obtained. This sheet is rolled up into a 
    cylindrical electrode, 30 mm long and 3 * 
    10-5 square metre cross-sectional area 
    with about 2 to 3 mm of filter paper at the free end. Apart from 
    the fact that the silver-silver chloride electrode obtained this 
    way is very reliable and lasts long, it also helps to minimise the 
    effects of electrode impedance. The only disadvantage is the fairly 
    long time the preparation takes.
A rock sample is cut into uniformly thick slice with the aid of 
    a powerful electrical cutting machine and its thickness measured 
    using a micrometer screw gauge. The electrodes are set up on 
    various positions on the boundary of the sample to represent 
    irregular electrode configurations. They are mounted on the rock by 
    affixing them in holes made in an insulating plate cut in the shape 
    of the sample. The plate is then clamped in such a way that the 
    electrode filter tips rest on the edge of the sample. Electrical 
    contact is made with sample by injecting the filter paper with 
    0.1 molar KCl solution. The insulating plate thus acts as a 
    socket for the electrodes.
The current source whose output could be varied by a separate 
    current adjuster provides current at two terminals on the selector. 
    This selector ensures that once the electrodes are affixed on the 
    sample the cyclic permutation of electrode function could be made 
    by the use of the selector gear without transferring the contacts 
    on the sample. The voltage-current measurement is done using two 
    digital multimeters of the same type. One multimeter measures 
    current and the other measures the voltage. The potentials and 
    currents corresponding to the four cyclic permutations of positions 
    1, 2, 3 and 4 on the rock sample are measured for the five boundary 
    arrays. Resistances R12,34 and 
    R23,41 are calculated and the specific 
    resistivity of each sample determined from the Van der Pauw 
    equation. The only precaution made was to ensure that the 
    preliminary drying and soaking processes allowed reproduction of 
    results.
One hundred and two rock samples were used for this experiment 
    and they comprised various crystalline basement units from 
    southwestern Nigeria. The localities from which the samples were 
    collected are shown in Fig. 2. The rock types include 
    gneisses, quartzite, amphibolite, biotite granite, granodiorite, 
    and charnockite. The results obtained are presented in the 
    following section.
RESULTS
The results indicate a wide overlap in the resistivities of the 
    various rock types (Table 1). This shows that the resistivity of a 
    rock sample is not diagnostic of its lithology.
Nonetheless, it is obvious that the gneisses have the lowest 
    resistivities, followed by biotite granite, granodiorite, 
    charnockite, amphibolite and quartzite. The range, mean and 
    standard deviation of the resistivities of the respective rock 
    types are presented in Table 1.

Most of the gneiss samples have resistivities less than 7000 
    ohm-m while only 8% have resistivities higher than 9000 ohm-m 
    (Fig. 4a). The mean is 4739 ± 3149 ohm-m. The samples with 
    low resistivities (less than 3000 ohm-m) may characterize fractured 
    basement rocks while those with higher values are probably 
    indicative of unfractured bedrock. The biotite granite samples have 
    resistivities ranging between 8020 and 62 000 ohm-m. It may be 
    noted that 40% of these samples have resistivities in the range 20 
    000 to 30 000 ohm-m (Fig. 4b). The quartzites have the 
    highest resistivities, varying between 50 600 and 2 820 000 ohm-m, 
    although about 77% of those samples have resistivities less than 
    106 ohm-m.
It has been observed that even for the same rock exposure there 
    may be a wide range of resistivities for different samples. An 
    example of this was recorded from Osuntedo where 10 samples of 
    charnockite were collected from different parts of the same 
    outcrop. There is a wide disparity between the lowest (20 900 
    ohm-m) and the highest (175 000 ohm-m), this being a ratio of 
    8.37. In particular, the mean resistivity is 54 500 ohm-m 
    while the standard deviation is 44 000 ohm-m, giving a high 
    coefficient of variation of 81%. This is indicative of a high 
    degree of dispersion, which may be attributed to differences in 
    mineralogy at the respective portions of the exposure.
For a given rock type it is to be expected that there will also 
    be variations in resistivity from one locality to another. It has 
    been found out, for instance, that the Ayete quartzite samples have 
    lower mean resistivities (156 000 ± 154 000 ohm-m) than those from 
    Mokola, Ibadan (429 000 ± 273 000 ohm-m) while those from the 
    University of Ibadan Campus have the highest at 2 260 000 ± 395 000 
    ohm-m. Similarly, the mean resistivities of biotite granite from 
    Idere (29 600 ± 6 000 ohm-m) are lower than those from Tapa (30 200 
    ± 20 000 ohm-m) and Ayete (36 300 ± 9 600 ohm-m). These variations 
    may also be explained by differences in mineralogy.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, a laboratory method has been used to measure the 
    electrical resistivity of fresh samples of arbitrarily shaped 
    samples of fresh crystalline basement rocks from southwestern 
    Nigeria. The results indicate that these rocks have very high 
    resistivities, ranging from about 1000 ohm-m to nearly 3 * 
    106 ohm-m. This is in agreement with 
    previous work. The granite gneisses samples have the lowest 
    resistivities, followed by banded gneiss, augen gneiss, biotite 
    granite, charnockite, granodiorite, amphibolite and quartzite. In 
    each case, there are large standard deviations of the mean 
    resistivity. One implication of these high resistivities is that 
    the rocks have very low porosity and very low water content.
A comparison of the results with those earlier reported for the 
    resistivity of fresh crystalline basement rocks from parts of 
    Nigeria and other parts of Africa (Table 2) shows a broad agreement 
    with the present work.
There is, in general, some correlation between the electrical 
    resistivity of the various rock types and their susceptibility to 
    chemical weathering. This may have some relationship with the 
    temperature of formation of the constituent minerals. For example, 
    quartzite (comprising largely of quartz) is a low temperature rock; 
    it has a very high resistivity and hence does not weather readily. 
    In most instances, quartzites are overlain by a fairly shallow 
    weathering profile, and stand up prominently as ridges. On the 
    other hand, the gneisses are characterised by lineations which 
    constitute planes of weaknesses and consequently show relatively 
    lower resistivities and weather more readily. Hence, gneisses are 
    often overlain by a very thick weathered mantle (Barker et al., 1992). Although granites contain similar amounts of feldspars 
    and ferromagnesian minerals as gneisses, in the former rock type 
    the minerals are not continuously linked even though the feldspars 
    in the granites may occur in megacrysts (David, 1988). It may be 
    pointed out that granite has a higher resistivity than the 
    gneisses, and is also less susceptible to attack by agents of 
    chemical weathering.
It is envisaged that the experimental data obtained in this 
    research would provide complementary information to those obtained 
    from sounding interpretation and subsequently extended to fractured 
    basement rocks.
