INTRODUCTION
The interpretation of meaning in natural language has been 
    identified by Ullman (1962) as the most ambiguous and most 
    controversial term in the theory of language. The ambiguity behind 
    the analysis of meaning arises from the fact that one word is 
    opened to various interpretations. Because of the difficulties in 
    analyzing meaning, philosophers, anthropologists, psychologists, as 
    well as linguists have shown concern toward analyzing meaning. 
    Lyons (1977) in attempt to analyze meaning decide to 
    breakdown the meaning of 
    meaning and the verb form to mean into ten sentences. From his 
    analyses, it shows that the meaning of meaning varies from one 
    sentence to the other, mostly influenced by the context and 
    situation of usage.
Also, in his attempt to analyze meaning 
    Firth (1957) break down meaning as a complex of relations rather 
    than an entity.
Firth tends to see the interpretation of meaning in relation to 
    other words rather than an autonomous entity in a sentence. Firth 
    identifies the fact that since a word can not stand on its own to 
    make an utterance, it analysis 
    should be better to look at it as complex relation rather than as 
    an entity. Udofot (2004) in her appraisal on meaning analyses 
    observes that meaning is the most elusive and the most 
    controversial phenomenon in the study of language. These 
    controversy surrounding the analyses of meaning can be traced far 
    back in history as recorded in Plato's dialogue, Creatylus
     which is traced to the Greek philosophers. 
    In an attempt to solving the problem of the analysis of meaning 
    came the introduction of the nominal theory. As the theory of 
    meaning analysis in natural language, the nominal theory claims 
    that the relationship between a word and the thing to which it 
    refers is the relationship of meaning. Thus, according to Udofot 
    (2004: 55) "the signifier is a word in 
    the language and the signified is an object in the 
    world that it stand for or denotes . This theory was useful to some 
    extend in analyzing meaning, especially nouns, some 
    adjectives and onomatopoeic words but 
    interms of abstract nouns like 
    beauty, happiness, 
    joy, handsome as well as 
    verbs that reflect a state of being can not be analyze using this 
    theory. Thus, the nominal theory was unable to give a universally 
    acceptable analysis of meaning.
Also, in an attempt to analyze meaning in the natural language
    , came the conceptual theories. 
    This theory sees meaning of a word or expression to be the concept 
    associated with it in the mind of the speaker or hearer. This view 
    is obtained in (Lyons
    1977:. 122) cited in Udofot (2004). 
    Looking at this theory, it was unable to analyze meaning in natural 
    language , because people have 
    different ideas about thing. For instance, somebody that has not 
    contact computer anywhere will not link the name computer with the 
    object, neither will he or she knows how to operate the computer. 
    Thus to ask such a person to boot computer
    , will becomes difficult to him or 
    her. This also is one of the criticisms against the conceptual 
    theories, it encourage subjectivism 
    and introspection. Critics that hold this opinion argue that if 
    everyone has to look into his mind, it will be difficult to have 
    objective meaning (Udofot, 2004:. 61).
Since the conceptual theories were criticized for not been 
    adequate enough in analyzing language, the contextualists came up 
    with the contextual theories. These theories try to look at the 
    meaning of the word in term 
    of the context in which it is used.
These theories also are criticized in that not all concepts are 
    capable of being subjected to operation, that is not all subject 
    are observable. Also, another objection to the contextual view of 
    meaning is that studying meaning in context narrows the list of 
    potential meaning.
All of the aforementioned theory could not give useful analysis 
    of meaning in the natural language, and the inability for these 
    theories to analyze meaning pave way for a more comprehensive theory
    , that combines contextual, 
    behavioural as well as other theories in the analyses and 
    interpretation of meaning in the natural language. This theory is 
    known as pragmatics.
Pragmatics according to Ndimele (1997:. 117)  is the analysis of meaning that 
    takes into account not only the observable aspects of a language 
    event but also the unobservable: the choices 
    the users make, the constraints the 
    encounter in using their language for social interaction and the 
    effect their use of language has on other participants.
This is to say in analyzing meaning, 
    pragmatics takes into consideration
    , the context, the culture in 
    which the language is used, the situation that prompted the usage, 
    as well as the that pragmatics is in the main a contextual theory 
     "except that it includes 
    all that can be discussed under context, culture, style, society 
    and their influence on meaning interpretation. For example, a 
    pragmatic analysis of meaning will take into consideration
    , why it is that in Yoruba 
    whenever a younger one wants to greet an elder, he or she will used 
    "Eshe"  
    whereas when he or she wants to address her mate, she will use 
    "oshe". This situation can only 
    be addressed through reflection on the Yoruba's culture and it 
    is very necessary in pragmatics interpretation of meaning.
Also, pragmatics will take into consideration the context and 
    situation that influenced individual usage of language. For 
    instance, it is observed that one is talking or communicating with 
    a friend or relative, the language use will reflect this intimate 
    relationship.
Pragmatics in analyzing meaning considered the following factors 
    to be essential, in discovering 
    the meaning of an expression. These 
    are the situation in which the utterance is produced, the shared 
    previous knowledge or common cultural background of the speaker and 
    the hearer and the linguistic context in 
    which a particular utterance occurs.
CONCLUSION
Pragmatics having considered several factors in analyzing meaning
    ; both the context, situation, norms 
    of culture as well as linguistics and paralinguistic features in 
    analyzing meaning. It is considered to be an advanced theory of 
    meaning interpretation.
