PROBLEMS OF MEANING IN NATURAL LANGUAGES
The concept of meaning is the most controversial phenomenon in 
    the study of language. The controversy of meaning has been observed 
    by linguists, philosophers, and many others. According to the 
    famous linguist, Ullmann, he looks at meaning as "the 
    most ambiguous and most controversial term in the theory of 
    language" (Ullmann 1962:.54).
The ambiguous nature of meaning is manifested in the fact that 
    in almost any language, one expression can be subjected to many 
    interpretations depending on the speaker, the hearer, and the 
    situation where the expression is made. This process can be 
    referred to the use of idiomatic expression which is subject to 
    meaning other than the one it appears to have.
Obviously, it is impossible to sit down and learn by heart all 
    the idioms in the English language. One picks up idioms as one 
    learns to use the language. Idioms have its origin from human 
    activities and occupations and have multiplied with time.
It is common that even if you know the meaning of each word used 
    in an idiom and have a good understanding of the structure of the 
    words that make up the idiom, you will not necessarily understand 
    the meaning of the idiom. For example,
(1) it is a storm in a tea cup.
This idiom means that, it is much excitement about something 
    trivial. In this case, if one considers the meaning of each word in 
    the expression, it is quite different from the real meaning of the 
    idiomatic expression. This contributes to the problem up 
    meaning.
Another idiomatic example is 'The man kicked 
    the bucket' which simply means 
    the man died'. If this saying is directed to the nursery school pupils, the 
    child, would look at the literary meaning of kicking the bucket 
    rather than implied. For instance, if a child is told, "The 
    man who came to your class yesterday has kicked the bucket". 
    He/She would look at it at the angle of performing the action of 
    kicking the bucket on the ground rather than the underlined or 
    implied meaning of the expression: This constitutes immense problem 
    of meaning to natural 
    language
Mother problem of meaning is that of collocation. When two or 
    more words are together We say that 
    they collocate: Example can be seen in a sentence: He has been in 
    steady employment since 1990.
Steady could mean firm, constant, 
    regular, and so on but none of them can replace 
    "steady" in the context. Also, the 
    opposite of hero is coward. 
    This will only be true in the context of situation. For instance, 
    in the sentence: Daniel Amokachi is a national hero.
In this context, 'coward' cannot replace 
    hero. National hero is an 
    acceptable English collocation not National 
    coward. Therefore, when a word is replaced with another 
    it should make the expression 
    Un-English. This also constitutes to the problem of 
    meaning.
Furthermore, the process of homonyms in English language can 
    also contribute immensely to the problem of meaning. Homonyms in 
    this sense refers to the words that have the same form (spelling) 
    and sound but different meanings or origins.
This is not a surprise matter, according to Udofot in 
    English semantics (1998:.1) she says 
    "One word 'bank' for instance can 
    refer to a financial Institution, a spot near a river or the 
    movement of an aircraft". In this case, if someone says that, 
    I am going to the bank. There is an element of ambiguity in that 
    expresssion. The hearer may be confused for a moment whether the 
    speaker is referring to the financial institution or the bank of 
    the river.
In the above illustration, it is clear that ambiguity can also 
    create another problem of meaning in the natural language due to 
    the vagueness of meaning.
Further examples can be seen in the words like 
    mail, ball, 
    box, plain, and 
    faint.
In the word like 'mail', means 
    'letters'. 
    Example, in the sentence: The postman has brought the 
    'mail' this morning. This 
    talks about letters. Another meaning of mail is 
    "armour". In the context 
    'mail' 
    means something different from the letter.
Another example is "ball'. Ball can 
    be seen as 'a sphere'. Example, in the 
    sentence: The footballer kicked the ball. Ball 
    also means something different from ''a 
    sphere' that is "dance 
    party". This can be illustrated in the sentence: I 
    shall take Caro to the 'ball' 
    tonight.
Further example is 'box' which means 
    'punch' 
    and 'container'. The sentences 
    here differentiate them:
(1) I will box him if he annoys me. (punch)
(2) I put my books in the box.(container)
Plain means 
    "obvious". It also means 
    "open 
    filed? The sentences here differentiate them:
(1) It is plain that she loves me.
(2) I can see the horse grazing on the 'plain'.
Another example in the paper is 
    "faint" which means 'not 
    clear' and 'lose 
    consciousness' examples can be seen in the following 
    sentences:
(1) Your handwriting is too 'faint'. Please make it 
    legible
(2) If you do not eat well, you may 'faint'.
Further problems of meaning can be seen in terms of Homophones 
    that is, words that have the same sound but different forms 
    (spellings) and meanings. Examples can be seen in the words" 
    allowed and aloud". The 
    first one, allowed means 
    permitted while the other 
    aloud means not silently. If 
    the speaker makes the sentence:
(1) He allowed me to slap him
(2) He spoke aloud.
The sentences if made simultaneously, the hearer may be confused 
    of the two words which sound alike. In case if he/she wants to 
    write the sentences, he/she may take the other one to be another or 
    vice versa in unsuitable context.
Another example in that aspect can be seen in the word like 
    ''fair' 
    which means ''just' and the other word 
    ' fare' 
    which means money charged for a journey in the 
    sentences:
(1) It is not fair to condemn him for a crime he did not 
    commit.
(2) The taxi driver asked for his fare.
If the two sentences above are made in a taxi, the passengers 
    may be confused about the meaning of the words 
    'fair and fare' 
    which sound alike except the educated ones. This also warrants the 
    problem of meaning.
Synonyms also create another problem of meaning in natural 
    language. This refers to words that have almost the same meaning. 
    Lexicographers have proved that no two English words are exactly 
    identical in their meanings and usages just as no two human faces 
    are likely to be completely identical in their features. Although 
    some words may appear identical at first, a close examination will 
    show some differences in the usage. For example 'rich and 
    wealthy' appear to mean the 
    same thing. However, while 'wealthy' is used in 
    relation to money and property, 'rich' colour, rich 
    cake, rich decoration, rich 
    soil, and so on. Again, while 'fragrance' is used in 
    reference to ''perfume', its synonym 
    'aroma' 
    and 'odour' show differences in usage. While 'aroma' is used in relation 
    to wine or spirit, 'odour' often suggests a 
    foul smell. This also causes problems of meaning.
Problems of meaning mainly occur when words are used in order 
    than their original or primary sense (meaning). When words are used 
    in this case they are said to be used figuratively. Over long 
    period of time, words tend to develop new meanings. Sometimes very 
    different from the original or primary meanings. Some of these 
    later meanings arise as a result of close resemblances between 
    things or situations. For instance, 'eye' primarily means 
    an organ of vision. But owing to likeness to the 
    gap in a needle, we refer to that part of the needle as its 
    'eye' 
    similarly, 'foot' primarily signifies a 
    part of the body. However, because of the position of the foot, we 
    have such other references as 'foot of 
    a tree', 'foot of a page' and so on. 
    Another example is 'boil' in the original or 
    primary sense of it 'boil' means action 
    of heated liquid but in the figurative or secondary sense 
    the word 'boil' also means 
    agitation. Examples are illustrated in 
    sentences:
(1) I boil water for tea. (action of heated liquid)
(2) I boil with anger each time he tells me lies. (agitation)
