GENERAL INTRODUCTION
1.1 INTRODUCTION
Iko [Ìkò] is one of the languages under the Lower Cross (LC) 
    language group. It is a minimally described language spoken by the 
    Iko people of Eastern Obolo Local Government Area (L.G.A.), who live along the Atlantic Coast in present day Akwa 
    Ibom State of Nigeria.
The continued existence of this language is severely threatened 
    by the combined dominance of English, Ibibio and Obolo languages on 
    the one hand, and the adverse sociological effects of the 
    prevailing poor economic situation of the area on the other hand 
    (Urua 2003).
Kuju (1999) opines that a language should be considered 
    endangered when it is no longer spoken by its youth. Also, Fakuade 
    (1999) citing Hale (1992:.23) defines endangerment as “ 
    the incidence of domination by a more powerful 
    language”. Brenzinger, Heine and Sommer (1991:.25) is 
    cited by Ugwoke (1999) to have defined an endangered language as 
    one which has less than 5,000 speakers. And according to Bamgbose 
    (1993), an endangered language is a language that is not used in 
    formal education and whose communicative role is limited to 
    in-group communication. In general, such a language is used mainly 
    for traditional purposes such as rituals, festivals, village 
    meetings, etc. We consider Iko to be an endangered language because 
    it meets these criteria.
The 1996 Universal Declaration of Linguistic Rights recognizes 
    the existence of Endangered Languages (ELs) and the need to 
    preserve them as the ‘inalienable’ and 
    nonnegotiable possessions and rights of those who own them as God’s 
    gifts. Unfortunately, Iko does not enjoy this linguistic right. The 
    question is “How can Iko language be preserved, or following the 
    Nigerian National Policy on Education, used in early formal child 
    instruction when there has been no detailed description of the 
    structure of the language?
It is against this backdrop that this research aims to provide a 
    systematic linguistic description of aspects of Iko phonology with 
    a view to reversing the steady march of the language toward 
    extinction.
1.2 BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON IKO
1.2.1 THE PEOPLE
The Iko people inhabit the southern tip of Akwa Ibom State of 
    Nigeria, the exact location being N40 
    31.51 and E70 
    46.61. This piece of information was obtained from a 
    palmpilot, which is a Global Positioning System 
    (GPS) device that can indicate one’s exact position at the push of 
    a few buttons. 1 I owe this 
    piece of information to Professor Dr Dafydd Gibbon of Universität 
    Bielefeld, Germany.
Not much is known about the migration history of Iko people.
This is shrouded in mystery and secrecy, and Iko elders were 
    reluctant to divulge it to us. The people claim that they have 
    lived in their present location for as long as they could remember 
    and that their ancestors, being fishermen, were searching for 
    rivers and streams for profitable fishing when they found land in 
    Iko.
They initially settled on the Atlantic Coastline and the island 
    of Iko Nta, but some of the people later moved inland to their 
    present location. As at today, there are 
    eight2 As at the time of the 
    1991 census only four Iko villages viz: Iko Town, Iko Nta, Iko 
    Ikpilaha and Atabrikang were officially recognized. The additional 
    four villages were given official recognition later. Iko 
    speaking communities namely, Okoro Eto, Ubum Irung, Akprikpe, 
    Ekpitim, Edonwi (these constitute Iko Town), Iko Nta, Iko Ikpilaha, 
    and Atabrikang. These eight communities, along with Kampa community 
    constitute Iko Clan.
However, the people of Kampa do not speak Iko. Actually, Kampa 
    is culturally not part of Iko. Its inclusion in Iko Clan is purely 
    for political and administrative convenience (Muffat Ijokhomans; 
    Amos Ukafia p.c.., March 2003). 
    We found out that the Kampa people speak Ubani, 
    a different language altogether.
The harmful effects of oil exploration and exploitation by oil 
    prospecting companies, notable among which are EXXONMOBIL, 
    TOTAL-FINA-ELF and SHELL PETROLEUM DEVELOPMENT COMPANY, ravage the 
    natural environment of Iko communities.
This, however, is not our focus in this research.
The predominant occupations of Iko males are high-sea 
    (commercial) fishing and boat building, while their women engage in 
    subsistence fishing, farming and fish selling.
There is some controversy with regards to the actual population 
    of Iko people. Connell (1991) and Grimes (2000) put Iko population 
    figure at about 5000. Urua (2003) on her part puts Iko population 
    at 9554. Yet the people themselves claim multiples of these 
    figures. According to Chief Anthony Jerry Anantia, the Village Head 
    of Iko Town, and Clan Head of Iko Clan, the population of Iko is 
    between 25,000 and 30,000 (p.c., 
    March 2003). Unfortunately, the 1991 Nigerian National Population 
    Census figure for Iko is unreliable because as at then Eastern 
    Obolo, the L.G.A. from which Iko is now 
    administered was under Ikot Abasi L.G.A. and 
    figures of some non-Iko communities were in error computed for Iko 
    since these communities were and still are administered from Iko 
    for administrative convenience. On our part, we put Iko population 
    at 3870. This number is arrived at by our computation of the 1991 
    census figures for actual Iko villages as follows: Iko Town – 2309; 
    Iko Nta – 623; Iko Ikpilaha – 552; Atabrikang – 386 (National 
    Population Commission, 1991).
The figure we have given above is different from that given in 
    Urua (2003). This disparity is because in the latter the figure for 
    Ikpetim clan in Ikot Abasi L.G.A. [5684] was in error computed for Iko because of the 
    similarity of the name with that of an Iko village - 
    Ekpitim. As at 1991, Ekpitim was not an 
    autonomous village but was under the village administration of Iko 
    Town.
However, we would like to point out that over the years, and 
    given the 1996 population projection figures of the 1991 census, it 
    is most likely that Iko population has increased, though a greater 
    percentage of these speakers, especially the youth, reside outside 
    Iko community.
1.2.2 THE LANGUAGE
Iko belongs to what Essien (1991) and Urua (2000) call the 
    Ibibiod group, and what Udoh (1998) calls 
    Ibom languages. This is a cluster of 
    genetically related languages within the Lower-Cross subfamily. 
    Urua (2000:.3) following Connell (1991) provides a 
    diagrammatic classification of Lower-Cross Languages as shown 
    below.
Ibibiod languages collectively have about three million speakers 
    (Grimes 2000, cited in Urua 2003). Yet, individually, they are 
    stigmatized as minority languages in Nigeria and 
    treated as such by reason of the number of speakers of the 
    individual languages, obviously in unfair comparison with the 
    so-called major Nigerian languages namely, 
    Hausa, Yoruba and Igbo. To be expected, Iko also bears this stigma 
    of minority language, with its attendant consequences.
Due to its geographical proximity with Obolo, Iko is often 
    assumed to be a dialect of the latter. But as Connell (1991) points 
    out, there appear to be no linguistic characteristics common to the 
    two languages that cannot be attributed either to their common 
    heritage or borrowing; certainly there is no question of mutual 
    intelligibility between Obolo and Iko. However, there appears to be 
    some level of mutual intelligibility between Iko and Ibeno its 
    eastern neighbour, as testified by the Clan Head of Iko, Chief 
    Anthony Jerry Anantia (p.c., 
    March 2003).
1.2.3 THE LINGUISTIC SITUATION IN IKO
Iko has no orthography yet. The language has no detailed 
    description of its phonological structure, upon which an 
    orthography could be based. Therefore, there are no reading/ 
    teaching materials in it. It is used in formal education only in 
    the first three years of primary school, but it is not taught as a 
    school subject. In the religious domain, the language is used in 
    delivering church sermons and announcements, along with the Efik 
    language Bible and Hymnbook. Iko is not used in the mass media at 
    all. In fact, its current sphere of use is only in spoken or oral 
    communication and this only within the community.
Iko language is threatened by other languages which are in 
    contact with it and which compete with it for dominance in the 
    area. The three languages that pose the most serious threats to Iko 
    are English, Ibibio and Obolo (Urua, 2003). The nature and manner 
    of these threats are discussed below.
English is the official language of Nigeria and by extension the 
    language of upward social mobility.
Consequently, Iko pupils and students are encouraged to acquire 
    and master English language early. Secondary school students are 
    not only taught in English, but are also compelled to use English 
    in everyday conversation within the school premises, while the use 
    of Iko language is effectively discouraged by the heavy penalties 
    meted out to defaulters.
This unfortunate situation which is rampant in the southsouthern 
    and south-eastern parts of Nigeria, is informed by the erroneous 
    belief that the use of the local language(s) will interfere with or 
    even prevent a good mastery of English.
The fallout of this situation is that students grow up with a 
    distorted perception of their language as being inferior, primitive 
    and undesirable, and its use outside the home unprofitable.
Ibibio on its part is the unofficial lingua 
    franca of Akwa Ibom State. It is a standardized language, 
    has a larger population of speakers – Ibibio is spoken in fourteen 
    out of the thirty-one L.G.As of Akwa Ibom State and 
    is understood by most other language groups in the state. The use 
    of Ibibio by secondary school students within Iko is equally 
    discouraged in favour of English. Yet, Ibibio enjoys a prestigious 
    status as the state’s unofficial lingua franca. 
    Given the dearth of lucrative jobs within Iko community, Iko 
    indigenes usually move to Ibibio speaking parts of the state in 
    search of greener pasture, and invariably learn to communicate in 
    Ibibio. Consequently, most Iko speakers also speak or at least 
    understand Ibibio.
Because of the seemingly prestigious status of Ibibio in the 
    state, it is not uncommon to find Iko indigenes, especially the 
    youth, conversing in Ibibio, even within their homeland.
Obolo on the other hand is the dominant, standardized and 
    prestigious (?) language spoken in Eastern Obolo L.G.A., and the unofficial lingua franca of 
    the locality. This is hardly surprising considering that this 
    language has an orthography on which were based such publications 
    as Ikpa Uriak Melek Okwa 
    Mbuban (1969), Ikpa 
    Mbuban-Agañ Ayaya Inyaña-Ibot (1991), and 
    Okwa Itoñ (2003) among 
    others. These are respectively the Obolo language Hymnbook, New 
    Testament Bible and the Book of Psalms. Interestingly, Ibibio, the 
    so-called Standard language in the state has neither a translation 
    of the Bible nor a Hymnbook.
Obolo is taught as a school subject in all Obolo speaking 
    communities of the L.G.A. It is also worth mentioning 
    that Okoroette, the Local Government 
    Headquarters/Secretariat is an Obolo speaking community. Non-Obolo 
    indigenes working in the secretariat (including Iko native 
    speakers) must of necessity learn to communicate in Obolo. The 
    underside of this state of affairs is that every Iko speaker also 
    speaks or at least understands Obolo. During our fieldtrips, we 
    noticed that it is taken for granted that every person from Eastern 
    Obolo L.G.A. (including non-Obolo indigenes) 
    should understand Obolo language. For instance, we noticed a 
    tendency by Obolo indigenes to address Iko speakers in Obolo 
    language, even when they knew that their addressees were native Iko 
    speakers.  
The overall effect of this scenario is that over the years, as 
    the relevance load of Iko language continues to drop, the language 
    has been steadily marching toward extinction because the youth who 
    should pass the language to the next generation are not doing so, 
    due to the fact that they no longer speak Iko as a language of 
    first choice. In fact, there is much pressure on native Iko 
    speakers to make use of other languages if they want to be upwardly 
    mobile economically. Indeed, whichever way one looks at it, Iko is 
    a seriously endangered language and as Ladefoged (2000) predicts of 
    endangered languages, Iko may perhaps “not be spoken a hundred 
    years from now”, except serious intervention measures are taken to 
    save it.
