Meaning in Natural Language
This general view of the status of language has enjoyed a 
    lengthy ascendancy. Critics, such as Wittgenstein, have not 
    prevailed. The recent focus by Dretske, Fodor, Pinker, and others, 
    on a semantics for mentalese exists 
    along side followers of Grice, who focus on the role 
    speaker intent plays in determining the meaning in natural 
    language. All hold that the principal bearers and determinants of 
    semantic properties are something other than natural language.
There is an alternative to the view that natural language has 
    meaning only that is derivative, as an encoding of thought and the 
    primary bearer of meaning. Since the cardinal aim of language is to 
    convey information about how things are viewed in the world, in 
    consonance with Locke's dire warning that taking words as 
    standing "for the reality of things" is 
    a perverting the use of words, and brings 
    unavoidable obscurity and confusion into their 
    signification, whenever we make them stand for 
    anything but those ideas we have in our own 
    minds.
In the analysis of how the meaning of natural language can be 
    understood as a special case of natural meaning. Language, of 
    course, is at least complicated by the presence of intelligent 
    language users. It is arguable that linguistic meaning is as much 
    like natural meaning as it could be, given the presence of an 
    intelligent agent in the causal web linking world and linguistic 
    representation.
The physical systems designed to convey information, 
    non-intelligent instruments that are such that their display states 
    mean one thing or another. Having developed a case for a meaning 
    for linguistic displays that is related to natural meaning, three 
    ways are set out in which meaning for natural language might be 
    understood as derivative of natural meaning. Then, let us 
    reconsider the arguments at the beginning of Paul Grice's 
    classic paper, 
    Meaning, to see if there is as great a difference between 
    natural meaning and linguistic meaning as Grice makes out.
Over the years since Grice' s "Meaning" appeared, 
    attention to his work has largely focused on his theory of 
    non-natural meaning. Independently, others have been developing 
    accounts of various types of natural meaning. Much of this work has 
    been done by Fred Dretske and Jerry Fodor, who have been interested 
    in understanding the meaning of mental representations in terms of 
    information they carry. While many have rejected Grice's 
    highly intellectualized theory of meaning, as far as I know they 
    have not discussed Grice's original distinction of the two 
    types of meaning. That distinction remains very interesting, and it 
    is useful, in light of subsequent 
    developments, to revisit his 
    paper.
Grice begins by making a distinction between two types of 
    meaning, then in the rest of the paper he attempts almost exclusively to the second of these, which 
    he calls "non-natural meaning". At the 
    very beginning of the paper, Grice invites readers to consider 
    three sentences having to do with meaning:
"Those spots mean measles."
"Those spots did not mean anything to me, but to the 
    doctor they meant measles."
"The recent budget means that we shall have a hard 
    year."
These are all cases of natural meaning, or, following Grice, 
    meaning(n). Note that not all bearers of natural meaning are 
    natural events or facts - the last example is a budget. Generally, 
    natural meaning concerns symptoms or signs or some state of 
    affairs. Other examples might be "smoke means fire", 
    "that drop in barometric pressure means rain", and 
    "the fact that the car is exhausting blue smoke means that it 
    is burning oil.".
In the cases of natural meaning, the connection between the 
    bearer of natural meaning and the state that it indicates does not 
    owe to agency. But even in cases like these one could suppose that 
    although no agent is a component of the causal connection, 
    nevertheless the existence of the causal connection itself is the 
    result of an intelligent agent. For example, one could suppose that 
    God has established the connection between measles and its 
    characteristic red spots, or between fire and smoke, perhaps just 
    so that we might know when someone has measles or that there is a 
    fire. If God were to act in these ways, he would be what Dretske 
    has called a "structuring cause" - He 
    would cause it to be the case that measles cause red spots, or that 
    fire causes smoke. The meaning of smoke and spots would still be 
    natural meaning, for God would not on each occasion of the 
    appearance of spots or smoke cause them to appear. Rather He would 
    have arranged things so that in the ordinary course of things, 
    measles cause red spots and fire causes smoke, so that from red 
    spots one may infer measles, and from smoke one may infer fire.
Cases where natural meaning is at work as the result of 
    structuring agents are particularly interesting for exploring the 
    connection between semantics and pragmatics, and the relation of 
    natural and non-natural meaning. Accordingly, considering the 
    special case of instruments, devices, which are designed to convey 
    information about some condition. These have, as it were, 
    artificial natural meaning.
The lights and gauges on the instrument panel of a car indicate 
    various facts about the condition of the vehicle. That the leftmost 
    light is on may indicate that the oil pressure is low. Or, as we 
    might also put it, that the light is on means that the oil pressure 
    is low. Although the light is an artifact, it functions as an 
    indicator or symptom of states of affairs. Statements about what 
    the display states of an instrument mean have the same logic as the 
    natural meaning of red spots on the skin and clouds in the sky. 
    Namely, they support inference to certain states of affairs, and it 
    they do not support inference to anyone meaning anything by turning 
    on the light. It is less clear (to use another one of Grice's 
    tests for non-natural meaning) whether they support inference to 
    something of the form:
The fact that the leftmost light is on mean "the oil 
    pressure is low".
In part this uncertainty, at least on my part, is because I am 
    not sure that this claim, that a fact means a sentence, is 
    coherent. But perhaps we could say :
The fact that the leftmost light is on means the same as would a 
    talking car that said, "the oil pressure is low".
This would relate the meaning of one state of affairs, the fact 
    that the light is on, to the meaning of another state of affairs, 
    one that involves producing an instance of a sentence. This at 
    least seems coherent, unlike Grice's own example involving a 
    quoted sentence. In any case, it seems reasonable to suspect that 
    Grice' s example has paraphrases that are coherent in 
    idiolects other than his own.
The oil pressure light can malfunction. Then its being on might 
    not mean that the oil pressure is low. Of course, it is supposed to 
    mean that the oil pressure is low. And it usually means that. But, 
    if it is malfunctioning, that is not what its being on now means. 
    This may appear to be a difference with some forms of natural 
    meaning, where there is an invariable connection between the thing 
    or state said to have the meaning and the meaning. But it is not 
    unusual even with paradigms of natural meaning for the connection 
    not to be invariable. Clouds that usually mean storms sometimes 
    appear without the storms, (and the storms may arrive unheralded by 
    any clouds). Most disease symptoms can appear in a variety of 
    conditions. S o there can be lack of 
    an invariable connection between bearer of natural meaning and its 
    meaning. We might then say "x usually means p". Common 
    simple single-purpose dashboard indicators are always each directly 
    connected with the sensors for the conditions they indicate. Such 
    single purpose indicators 
    may be supplanted by more sophisticated indicator systems. And in 
    order to understand meaning, it may be useful to consider what 
    would happen to meaning in more sophisticated indicator systems.
Now let us turn to reconsider the rest of Grice's 
    distinction between natural and non-natural meaning. Grice gives 
    two examples of what he subsequently calls non-natural meaning, and 
    then he draws five conclusions about the difference between natural 
    and non-natural meaning. His examples:
"Those three rings on the bell (of the bus) mean 
    that the bus is full."
"That remark, 'Smith couldn't get on 
    without bis trouble and strife,' meant that Smith found his 
    wife indispensable. "
With regards to these, Grice says that it is characteristic of 
    such cases of non-natural meaning that one can say "x means 
    that p, but in fact not p". Thus his first conclusion is:
1. Using the first of these, I can as well say, "But 
    it isn't in fact full - the conductor has made a 
    mistake"; and I can use the second and go on, "But in 
    fact Smith deserted her seven years ago."
However it seems to me that this may not be true of the bell 
    ringing example! If the bus is not full, then those three rings on 
    the bell did not mean that the bus is full. Perhaps they are 
    supposed to mean that the bus is full, and perhaps they usually 
    mean that the bus is full, and perhaps they were intended to mean 
    that the bus is full, but they did not in fact mean the bus is 
    full. Similar considerations apply to the second example. The 
    remark - Smith' s remarking - did not mean that Smith finds 
    his wife indispensable, although it is plausible to suppose that it 
    was intended to be taken by Smith's auditors to mean that.
Also, as mentioned above, there appear to be cases of natural 
    meaning where there is not an invariable connection between a type 
    of sign and a type of indicated state of affairs. Thus, I can say 
    "spots like those usually mean measles, but not in this 
    case." And one could say much the same of the three rings of 
    the bell on a bus not yet full.
Grice's second point about natural and non-natural 
    meaning:
I can argue from the first to some statement about 
    "what is (was) meant" by the rings on the bell and from 
    the second to some statement about "what is (was) meant" 
    by the quoted remark.
This point seems correct. However, these sentences seem 
    elliptical for an explicit attribution of agency to the bell ringer 
    and the remarker. It is not that something is meant by the quoted 
    sentence, rather it is meant by the speaker in using the quoted 
    sentence. Compare a statement about what was accomplished by blows 
    to the midriff - this presumably is a covert attribution of agency, 
    elliptical for what x accomplished by x's blows to the 
    midriff. Similarly, in speaking about what was meant by 
    rin gs on a bell, I am speaking 
    about what x meant by x' s rings on a bell, or perhaps in the 
    case of meaning, what x intended to mean by x's rings on a 
    bell. The construction attributing meaning of this sort to bell 
    rings and remarks instead of an agent may be a natural 
    accommodation in cases where we don't know who the agent 
    is.
Taking into account from the first sentence to the conclusion 
    that somebody (viz., the conductor) meant, or at any rate 
    should have meant, by the rings that the bus is full, and I can 
    argue analogously for the second sentence.
Here Grice appears to be aware for the first time that we might 
    say something about what the conductor should have meant, by the 
    rings on the bell. But he does not seem aware that doing this 
    creates difficulties for his theory. For he later goes on to hold 
    that "A meant(nn)something by x" is 
    (roughly) equivalent to
But the last clause doesn't make sense - the conductor 
    presumably did intend the rings of the bell to produce an effect in 
    an audience, so what is the point of saying that he should have 
    done this? After all, if he should have intended, but did not 
    intend, to produce an effect in the audience, then presumably his 
    rings on the bell don't mean(NN) anything at all.
