CHAPTER ONE
INTRODUCTION
1.1 BACKGROUND OF THE STUDY
Language is a powerful weapon with which an individual expresses 
    his or her ideas, emotions, feelings and thoughts. Language is a 
    vehicle for transmission of culture from one generation to another. 
    It is also a means of communication amongst people, in a society. 
    For any individual to be useful in his society he must acquire the 
    language of his people with some level of competency.
The English language serves as the medium of expression among 
    various ethnic groups in Nigeria. English is recognized as a second 
    language in Nigeria, that is, second after the mother tongue. It is 
    used as official language and medium of instruction in Nigerian 
    schools. In spite of this, the English language is learned by the 
    majority of Nigerian children as a second language through formal 
    classroom encounter.
One of the basic objectives of teaching English language in 
    Nigerian schools is to enable the students to communicate 
    proficiently either in speech or writing. In order to determine the 
    attainment of students in the use of English language as a medium 
    of effective communication in writing, various types of tests are 
    conducted in the school. Such tests cover a wide range of language 
    skills such as writing, speaking, reading etc.
Akere (1995) says that the poor quality of English that is 
    taught and used by students is a nagging problem because most 
    Nigerian secondary school students are not good users of English 
    language. Aliyu (1995) from his study found that students’ 
    proficiency in English language as measured by the West African 
    Examination council (WAEC) seems to be declining rapidly since the 
    failure rate between 1991 and 1995 has been in the region of 70 – 
    75 percent. Report of the WAEC Chief Examiner for examination 
    written in May/June, 2002 indicated that over 60 percent of 
    students’ failed English 
    language. This trend of mass failure has not changed as observed by 
    Oyinloye (2006). Ayodele (2001) laments the low competency level of 
    Nigerian students in English language. He observes that this has a 
    dismal effect on the overall achievement of students in other 
    courses.
Ubahakwe (1979) laments the poor quality of teaching methods 
    used by the language teachers and calls for an urgent revolution of 
    the teaching methods.
Ekpenyong (2002) showed that English language enables Nigerians 
    to communicate across multicultural, multiethnic and 
    multi-linguistic groups for social interaction and commercial 
    contacts. Other writers such as Eyoboh (2008), Eyoh (2004a), Eyoh 
    (2004b), Ifeanesia (1998), Umoh (1987) and Achebe (1975) have 
    enunciated the importance of the language in the unity of 
    heterogeneous groups in Nigeria. Eyoh (2007) explained that apart 
    from unifying the country, English language serves as a reliable 
    language in which governments in Nigeria transact their businesses. 
    The executive, the judiciary and the legislative arms of Nigerian 
    governments from the Federal, through States to Local Governments – 
    make use of English language in their daily businesses.
English language is also the language for wider communication, 
    the language of commerce, general business transactions as well as 
    the language of education. It is with this language that Nigeria 
    expresses her diplomacy and cultural identity in the international 
    market; Nigeria politics, trade and broadcasting are all done to a 
    large extent via English language.
In the Nigeria educational system, not only is English the 
    language of instructions for the large part of the educational 
    system, it is also one of the core subjects at all levels. 
    Inspite of the acknowledged 
    importance of this subject, Ekpo (1992) as well as Udofot (2000) 
    have shown that the performance of students in the subject has been 
    poor. Many students of Akwa Ibom State origin are denied admission 
    into Universities due to poor performance in English language. Some 
    of the students who were provided admission into remedial 
    programmes in Universities, quite a number of them have problems 
    with English language.
The higher percentage of failure in English language among 
    secondary school students in Nigeria demands that steps be taken to 
    improve their performances.
In most areas of human endeavour where people wish productivity 
    to improve one useful strategy that has yielded results is the use 
    of guidance and counselling.
Secondary school students come from various backgrounds, have 
    various learning abilities, and some experience problems in the 
    attempt to perform well. Due to the emphasis placed on English 
    language as a compulsory and important subject that students must 
    pass at credit level before they can be admitted into institutions 
    of higher learning or even offered employment in most lucrative 
    fields, quite a lot of students become over anxious and emotionally 
    disturbed when considering what to do in order to do well in the 
    subject. This problem becomes serious when the student has 
    experienced failure in the subject either once or repeatedly in the 
    past. Consequently, their performance in English language may be 
    poor. Students from deprived home backgrounds and neighbourhoods 
    have been shown by Ene and Nkang (2001) to experience some problems 
    in school. This may occur where the home is of low income group, 
    learning facilities for English language may not be readily 
    available and these children may learn English only in the school. 
    This may make them perform below average and develop a self concept 
    that may not do well in the subject.
If this situation is allowed to continue, such affected students 
    may end up not doing well in school and eventually drop out. This 
    situation would have a lot of negative implications for the nation. 
    Guidance and counselling are provided in schools so as to help 
    students who experience problems to realize themselves and take 
    rational decisions that would lead to an improvement of their 
    situations.
Milner quoted in Udokang (2007) defines guidance and counselling 
    in education to embody the presentation of knowledge, the 
    information and or advice to individuals or groups in a structured 
    way so as provide sufficient material upon which they may base 
    their choices or decisions.
Guidance is therefore a process of helping an individual to 
    understand himself and the reason for acting as he does under 
    different situations, hence enabling him to make his decision based 
    on his potentials.
Sanders (2000) defines counselling as an activity freely entered 
    into by the person seeking help. Counselling activity itself is 
    designed to help in self exploration and understanding. It is a 
    person-to-person relationship in which one person helps the other 
    person to resolve an area of conflict that has not been hitherto 
    resolved (Thompson & Poppen, 1972).
One of the areas of counselling used to help people that have 
    experienced some problems to recover and make a meaningful living 
    is rehabilitation counselling. According to Lawrence (2005) 
    rehabilitation is a treatment or treatments designed to facilitate 
    the process of recovery from injury, illness or disease to a normal 
    condition as possible. The purpose is to restore some or all of the 
    individuals’ physical, sensory and mental capabilities that were 
    lost due to injury, illness or disease. Rehabilitation counsellors 
    are involved with assisting individuals who have disabilities to 
    maximize their potentials and their independence.
As explained by Kemjika (1996), the concept of reinforcement is 
    central in operant conditioning theory of B.F. 
    Skinner. A consequence that produces repetition (increase in 
    frequency) of behaviour is called reinforcement or reward. 
    Reinforcement thus refers in general, to any process by which some 
    response tendency is strengthened by presentation of a reinforcer. 
    Some psychologists prefer using that term reinforcement to 
    reward.
Kemjika (1996) explains that there is a distinction between 
    reinforcement and reinforcer. A reinforcer is anything, be it a 
    stimulus or material object that strengthens or increases the 
    frequency of behaviour. This means that it increases the 
    probability that a desired response will be repeated.
A partial consequence cannot be considered to be a reinforcer 
    until its effect on behaviour is determined. Reinforcement, on the 
    other hand is the effect of a reinforcer on a person or the 
    procedure for presenting the reinforcer.
Chauhan (1987) is of the view that any environmental event that 
    is programmed as a consequence of a response that can increase the 
    rate of responding is called reinforcement.
Reinforcement is a procedure for controlling behaviour, not a 
    hypothetical device that produces stimulus – response 
    connection.
Enang (2006) explains that reinforcement is any stimulus or 
    variable manipulated to increase the probability that a specific 
    desirable behaviour will occur at all or again or an undesirable 
    behaviour will be dropped.
Reinforcement can be continuous, partial or intermittent. It can 
    also be present through various schedules such as the fixed ratio 
    schedules, variable ratio schedules, fixed internal schedule, or 
    variable internal schedule. Generally, reinforcement produces 
    excitement not only in those who receive it but also in those who 
    witness the event. The excitement in those who witness others being 
    reinforced is known as vicarious reinforcement.
Reinforcement and rehabilitation counselling have been known to 
    be effective to enhance performance in several situations. It is 
    important to find out whether the two variables can contribute 
    towards an improvement in students performance in English language 
    in secondary schools in Uyo Local Government Area.
1.2 STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM:
The problem that attracts the attention of this researcher is 
    the high rate of failure of secondary schools students in English 
    language. Both in oral and written English, the performance of 
    students appear to be below average. This is manifested in the 
    large number of secondary school leavers that are denied admission 
    into Universities due to the low level of pass in English language 
    at the secondary school level. This problem not only denies the 
    students admission but also shuts the door of employment 
    opportunities against some especially those who seek employment in 
    top flight jobs in which high level of performance in English 
    language is required.
Furthermore, there are students who repeat classes due to poor 
    performance in the subject and have shown a tendency to develop a 
    culture of failure. These students have caused parents and 
    educators concern as to what should be done to help them out. 
    Reinforcement and rehabilitation counselling have been used to 
    improve performance of people in various fields of endeavour such 
    as in industry. The problem this study is to find out whether these 
    two factors can have a significant influence on students 
    performance in English language.
1.3 PURPOSE OF THE STUDY:
This study was carried out to investigate the effect of 
    reinforcement, rehabilitation counselling on students’ performance 
    in English language. Specifically, the study was designed to 
    achieve the following objectives:
i) To compare the performance of English language students who 
    received instructions with and without reinforcement.
ii) To compare the students’ performance in English language who 
    received instructions with and without rehabilitation 
    counselling.
iii) To ascertain the effect of reinforcement on the performance 
    of English language – male and female students.
iv) To examine the effect of rehabilitation counselling on male 
    and female students’ performance in English language.
v) To determine the joint effect of reinforcement and 
    rehabilitation counselling on students performance in English 
    language.
1.4 RESEARCH QUESTIONS:
i) How do student who receive reinforcement differ in their 
    English language performance from those who do not receive 
    reinforcement?
ii) How do students who receive rehabilitation counselling 
    differ in their English language performance from those who do 
    not?
iii) How does the English language performance of students given 
    material reward differ from those not given?
iv) How does non material reinforcement influence the English 
    language performance of students?
v) How do male students who receive reinforcement differ in 
    their English language performance from females who receive the 
    same reinforcement?
1.5 RESEARCH HYPOTHESES:
The following null hypotheses were stated to guide this 
    researcher in the study.
i) There is no significant difference between the English 
    language performance of students who received instructions with 
    reinforcement and those received without the reinforcement.
ii) There is no significant difference between the English 
    language performance of students who received instructions with 
    rehabilitation counselling and those who had no such 
    counselling.
iii) There is no significant difference in the performance of 
    SS2 students in English language when treated with material reward 
    and without.
iv) There is no significant difference in the performance of SS2 
    students in English language when treated with non-material rewards 
    and without.
v) There is no significant difference between male and female 
    students performance in English language when reinforcement is 
    used.
