Fact of history that binds Igbo and Yoruba
Over the years there have been various permutations by some Igbo 
    and Yoruba leaders that there are likely to be some cultural, 
    linguistic, and sociological link between the two ethnic groups. 
    Historians, sociologists, archeologists, anthropologists, linguists 
    and some other scholars in the humanities have presented one reason 
    or the other to show that the Igbos and the Yorubas have a common 
    linguistic and historical ancestry.
This claim is no longer controvertible given the abundance of 
    proofs and evidences available today to show that, in actual fact, 
    these two groups of people are the same, with plenty of cultural 
    and linguistic affiliation and similarities. Today, some of these 
    proofs are no more far to seek.
In his latest book entitled, How Yoruba and Igbo Became 
    Different Languages, Dr. Bolaji Aremo of Obafemi Awolowo 
    University (OAU), Ile Ife, Osun State gives thousand and one 
    examples that connect the two ethnic groups linguistically. The 
    beauty of this experiment is that it relies tremendously on modern 
    chronology and examples and other antiquities to prove his claim 
    and truly set the record straight.
Over the years, some critics have found this claim somewhat 
    inconsistent with the obvious yearning differences and gaps between 
    these two set of people. That notwithstanding, historically 
    evidences of affiliation and similarities can not be over 
    emphasised or disputed. This is what motivates the author, himself 
    a linguist to go into research for this work.
In the beginning he says: "I was first given the idea that 
    Yoruba and Igbo must be genetically related when a childhood 
    friend, Ogbonna told me that words for some well known body parts 
    are virtually the same in both languages. For instance, Yoruba 
    Imu/ Igbo, imi 
    which means nose. There is also Yoruba 
    eti/Igbo nti 
    which means ear. Also Yoruba 
    enu/Igbo onu 
    which stands for mouth. Other examples abound 
    like Yoruba orun/Igbo 
    onu meaning neck. And 
    so on and so forth. Much later in life, at the university, I was to 
    learn in Language class that Igbo and Yoruba and many other African 
    languages are members of the same language family. Those are 
    members of group languages which all developed out of a common 
    ancestor or a parent. And in the very distant past, these languages 
    were no more than mere dialects of the original language", the 
    author states.
And so in order to make these observations clearer and more 
    believable to the people, the author takes his time to delve into 
    many areas of similarities. He gives examples that do not only 
    stand the test of time but too good to be wished away even by the 
    most die hard citics. His resort 
    to other work of history and linguistic that anchor on this area 
    have helped to give not just credence but to also show that these 
    facts are there for all to see. This is why examples are very many. 
    "And there does not appear to be any other historical reasons 
    why the two languages can contain such an abundance of basic 
    vocabulary items that resemble each other in sound and 
    meaning".
More examples can also subsist here. In Igbo, you have 
    fuo oku which is fe 
    ina in Yoruba. This stands for raise a fire 
    by blowing at the burning wood. Also in Igbo, 
    lua iwu, you have Yoruba lu 
    ofin which means break the law. 
    Still we have tuo ujo in Igbo which in 
    Yoruba symbolizes se ojo that is 
    be timid or be a local 
    person.
In all these, it is noticed that both languages are tone 
    languages where low or high level of tone application matter a lot. 
    Yet in terms of meaning and spelling, very many words appear to 
    have deep similarities either in meaning or in connotation. This 
    indeed is the beauty of this exercise which if followed more 
    comprehensively can equally lead to more discoveries that can help 
    both ethnic groups to truly forge ahead as people of common 
    descent.
Beyond what a linguist can do, historians can also find it 
    imperative to do more to unearth more facts in this regard. It is 
    in line with this presentation that the author equally challenges 
    other academics in the Humanities to dig deeper 
    thatn he has done in order to get 
    more facts to make this historical and linguistic discovery more 
    elaborate and more celebrated.
In chapter two, he makes references to body parts where these 
    similaritie abound. In 
    Yoruba and Igbo, the jaw and the cheek are found in the same 
    category. Igbo has it as agba onu Yoruba 
    egbe enu. Armpit in 
    Yoruba is abiya, while in Igbo it is 
    abu. Intestines, 
    stomach, stand for ifun in 
    Yoruba while in Igbo it is afo or 
    avo. So also is 
    aka which is hand in 
    Igbo but apa in Yoruba. In some cases in 
    Yoruba dialect however, aka also stands 
    for arm or hand. The Igbo 
    aka as in finger also 
    signifies Yoruba ika which also stands for 
    finger andtoe.
Other examples abound in chapter two. They are very instructive 
    examples which open many vistas into many areas of examples. But in 
    chapter three, the book is a bit more profound and comprehensive. 
    This is more in the areas of common actions, processes etc like 
    weeping or tears which means 
    akwa in Igbo and 
    ekun in Yoruba. Akwa 
    ariri in Igbo while ekun aro 
    in Yoruba means cry of sorrow. Taken further 
    ariri or alili 
    shows extreme grief in Igbo as aro or 
    eriri means the same in Yoruba. There is 
    also aririo which is 
    plea, prayer or 
    request in Igbo but in Yoruba it is 
    arowa and so on and so forth.
In other chapters the author takes proper care of other areas of 
    communality in these two languages. But most interestingly he finds 
    it easier to focus attention on the different areas of 
    similarities. This indeed makes for easy comprehension and 
    assimilation of some of the cognate areas mostly. And so in six 
    chapters, there are enough examples in terms of variations, non 
    basic vocabulary which also includes implements, religion/beliefs, 
    foods/drinks, clothes/ornaments 
    and so on, in which people will certainly see enough proofs to 
    acknowledge the common ancestry of Igbo and Yoruba languages.
Apart from few errors and misrepresentations in the book, in 
    some instances, this is purely an academic book. It is a basic 
    prerequisite to understanding the language classification in kwa 
    language group where both Yoruba and Igbo languages belong. As it 
    is now, this book has succeeded in proving an age long historical 
    facts that both Igbo and Yoruba have the same ancestral linguistic 
    link. This is a fact of history as evidenced by Dr. Bolaji 
    Aremo
