The Untapped Culture of Dance
There are different types of music that are influenced by 
    western culture. Dr. Rasaki Ojo-Bakare, theatre director and 
    choreographer, University of Abuja is re-awakening a call for 
    Nigerians to take pride in things that's theirs. 
    Chinyere Okoye writes
Dance and music are perhaps the two most vibrant forms of 
    Nigerian art. It includes many kinds of folk and popular music 
    which is dependent on strong rhythms supplied by countless drums 
    and percussion instruments. Nigeria is rich in varied cultural 
    heritage derives from the mixture of its different ethnic groups 
    with Arabic and western cultural influences. Music and dance are 
    integral to Nigerian culture, and each ethnic group has its own 
    specialties. Traditional instruments include various types of 
    flutes, trumpets, musical bows, xylophones, and wooden clappers, as 
    well as many varieties of drums.
Dance in Nigeria has many varieties, 
    Ubakala shows their value system, and 
    helps resolve conflicts, and also institutes changes. 
    Ishan stilt dancers, dances in colourful 
    costumes and twist themselves in the air, while one Tiv dance, 
    called ajo, features male dancers who work 
    in pairs, and another involves teams of women who perform a dance 
    called icough by composing songs about 
    current events.
Dancers for the Ekiti, Yoruba wear head masks and they do 
    processional dances. The Hausa, who do not consider dancing to be a 
    craft, divide their dances into the categories of social dancing 
    and ceremonial bòorii dances.
Nigerian culture is as multi-ethnic as the people in Nigeria. 
    Nigerians still cherish their traditional languages, music, dance 
    and literature. Nigeria comprises of three large ethnic groups, 
    which are Yoruba, Hausa-Fulani and Igbo. However there are other 
    ethnic groups as well. Thus culture in Nigeria is most positively 
    multi-ethnic. Culture of Nigeria gives a lot of value to different 
    types of arts, which primarily include ivory carving, grass 
    weaving, woodcarving, leather, calabash, pottery, painting, cloth 
    weaving and glass and metal works.
For Bakare, a foremost playwright among the third generation of 
    Nigerian, an associate professor in the Theatre Arts Department of 
    the University of Abuja, was in the panels of the recent 
    Mnet's “Let's Dance” reality television show. The show 
    was designed to celebrate Nigeria's local content on DSTV and 
    powered by Verve. Rasaki frequently tours many countries of the 
    world where he showcases his artistry in stage productions. For 
    over 30 years, his creative energy has enriched the arts in the 
    area of dance, performing, creating, administering and theatre 
    scholarship.
Presently, he teaches theatre, dance and choreography at the 
    University of Abuja. "Nigerian culture gives a lot of 
    importance in treating the guests with utmost care and warmth dance 
    most times. Nigerians enjoy dancing; soccer, Polo, cricket, 
    swimming and wrestling are popular among the affluent classes. 
    Nigerian culture is as old as 2000 years and what makes it stand 
    out is its diversity,” he said.
In e-mail chat with THISDAY, he said that dance is a fabric of 
    “our cultural expression and is also very educative. Dance is an 
    art form that generally requires the movement of the body, usually 
    rhythmic and to music, used as a form of expression, social 
    interaction or presented in a spiritual or performance setting.
“Dance is also used to describe methods of non-verbal 
    communication between humans or animal’s motion in inanimate 
    objects, and certain musical forms or genres. In sports, 
    gymnastics, figure skating and synchronised swimming are dance 
    disciplines while martial arts, karate are often compared to 
    dances.
“Again, I believe Nigerians learnt a lot from “Let's 
    dance”, our own television stations in Nigeria are doing nothing to 
    promote our culture through dance. People are coming from other 
    places to tap from the benefits presented by our population. MNet 
    understands this, and has chosen to invest in developing local 
    content for the DStv bouquet.
“Stations like AIT have some of this infrastructure. What I am 
    emphasising is the will to do it. They concentrate on other things. 
    Is this not the same thing we say about Globacom and the rest of 
    the telecom companies? Have you ever seen Globacom sponsoring a 
    dance contest or a theatre work? No, they are all concentrating on 
    sports without assisting the cultural industry to grow.
“If Mnet, which is not a Nigerian company, would go all the way 
    to do what they have done, I think our own television stations 
    should begin to do something about putting their money into things 
    like this. They may be able to do it better than the foreign 
    stations are currently doing,” he said.
However, he said the totality of what “we describe as culture is 
    encapsulated in the dance art. Dance communicates every facet of 
    our lives as human beings and in combination with oral tradition, 
    oral poetry; dance is used as a tool to communicate tradition and 
    culture from one generation to another. So, apart from the 
    potential of dance for economic development, it’s an art you can 
    live on for the whole life.
“Dance is an integral part of your art; flexibility is not just 
    an integral part of dance but also an art form of the entire dance 
    programme. Whatever your involvement in dance is, major, minor, or 
    part-time enthusiast, you can choreograph your own dance steps.
Let's Dance is a soulful journey into the heart of Nigerian 
    culture. Let's Dance provides a unique platform to showcase 
    the richness of our culture, it provides an opportunity for the 
    dancing couples to understudy musical cultures from other lands 
    while they work to master their own.
"Audience learnt some vital lessons through Let's 
    Dance. First, every dance has a thematic preoccupation. Two, dance 
    is a fusion of styles. Three, the love of song and dance is common 
    to all tribes of Nigeria. Four, in dance always put your best foot 
    forward. Five, when you dance, remember to blend good 
    characterisation with good level of carriage. All in all, 
    Let's Dance provides total entertainment for Nigerians,” he 
    said.
Suddenly, it has become fashionable to dance, even very 
    rewarding to have more than a passing knowledge of dance. It 
    doesn't matter if such familiarity is in theory or practical. 
    The dividend may be less satisfying but lecturers, who teach dance 
    in the universities, will attest to how dance has gone through a 
    full circle.
According to him, “Let's dance” teaches viewers, especially 
    in these modern times when traditional things seem to no longer 
    hold attraction for many, that dance is part of our cultural 
    expression and the show has also revealed that Nigerians love 
    dancing.
"Let's Dance" provides a unique platform to 
    showcase the richness of our culture, it provides an opportunity 
    for togetherness, while they work to master their own.
On this note, I am telling Nigerians that we are losing; we are 
    the ones losing because we have relegated our cultural to the 
    background. It is what belongs to you that you can market.
“Your art is expected to market your products. Let me use this 
    analogy, I guess you know Youssou N’Dour and Baaba 
    Maal, the Senegalese dancers, wherever they go they wear what is 
    called the Senegalese and by so doing, their fans all over the 
    world started looking for that material to buy.
Today, Senegalese women are all over the world selling that 
    material and making foreign exchange for their country. But when 
    our P-Squared goes to London or New York to perform, whose culture 
    or product are they marketing there?
“If Tu-Face were to wear the Abeokuta Adire or the Ange of the 
    Tiv people or the other version of Ange of the Idoma people, the 
    one with the red and black stripes to perform in Tokyo, the 
    Japanese will start wearing our native fabrics because they are 
    fans of Tu-Face and the local people who make that fabric will 
    start earning foreign currency from the acts of Tu-Face. This is 
    what art is supposed to do for people.
“Now Nigeria is a Jeans and T-Shirt country, who marketed that? 
    The American artistes, this is 
    the foreign culture youths learnt from television and they want to 
    dress like their screen idols. They buy all kinds of Jeans 
    materials and for every pair of Jeans that we buy; we are helping 
    the American textile industry to grow while helping to kill the 
    Nigerian textile industry.
“So, we have no choice, we have to go back to our culture and 
    tradition and see how we can use them to develop ourselves 
    economically, especially now that the entire world has entered into 
    economic meltdown.
