No serious evaluation of contemporary African history, or of 
    sustainable economic development of the region, should ignore the 
    contributions of the creative literatures of her people to the 
    African debate. As a Nigerian it was often irritating to listen to 
    our African neighbours call us Africa's big-for-nothing giant. 
    No less a leader as Ghana's Jerry Rawlings in his 
    revolutionary years had opined to the world that Nigeria was an 
    imperialist stooge although he was later to apologise for that 
    meditated outburst. But through this millennial era when issues of 
    Sub Saharan African underdevelopment, and Nigeria's complicity 
    in leading the backward procession, recur in contemporary literary 
    and cultural experience one is left with no doubt that the bleak 
    prospects of a failed nation, by every definition of the word, 
    stare us squarely in the face. And what is more baffling is that 
    her writers and critics, at every creative and polemical exercise, 
    had severally warned of the (double) trouble with Nigeria without 
    genuine, remedial actions from our ever hustling managers of 
    affairs. That the country is a failed state from every political, 
    educational and economic assessment leaves few watchers in doubt, 
    and going by the metamorphosis in 2007 of another patch of 
    ineptitude in the Yaradua presidency and his PDF rogue party, all 
    that Nigeria has had to offer the civilised world for this 
    umpteenth time are the blighted reincarnations of Balewa, Ironsi, 
    Gowon, Babangida, Abacha and Obasanjo clownish kinglets and clown 
    cabinets.
Within this curious contradistinction was laid the ebullient and 
    intense spirit of Nigerian writing in all forms and genres of 
    literary and critical acclamation from Achebe and Soyinka at home, 
    through Okri and others in the Diaspora. It is a feat that has 
    found a ready parallel in the lotus flower that thrives in the 
    murkiest of vegetation. For sub Saharan Africa, it still leaves a 
    strange and morose aftertaste that this hopeless lack of purpose 
    that constitutes its average experiments in modernity has had minds 
    like Nkrumah, Mandela, Nyerere, to mention but a few, who once 
    guided its course. Why there has been very little or no impact of 
    sustainable economic growth and development from within is what 
    many creative literatures of the continent have offered on the 
    world reading table.
For me this entire collection can only but tenuously propose by 
    its arrangement a modest contribution to the discourse of 
    literature and society. Having begun in a forum with the usual 
    indictments in the trenchant style of new Nigerian poetry, there is 
    a sense of justification that the acerbity which exaggerates the 
    polemical concerns of the first essay presentation is attenuated by 
    subsequent tributes and happy reflections in the collection. One 
    can only wish that there can be more critical bards in the 
    societies of African folklore than we have had as of date, and that 
    a more intense study of African oral traditions, which I have only 
    briefly touched on the works of Chinweizu and the riddles of my 
    community, could well preserve the heritage of our people, if only, 
    to equip them towards confronting the challenges of modern 
    existence. Similarly the literary crafts and chat section 
    represented here might as well read as continuing holistic parts of 
    an entire viewpoint which is integral to the vision that African 
    writing must continue in the task of purposive artistic evaluation 
    of its merits and those of the environment in which it thrives.
There now attends in world readership the conviction that the 
    literatures of Africa, as cultural products of their peoples and 
    nationalities, are deeply enmeshed in the questioning of 
    historical, social, cultural, political, economic and religious 
    fundamentals of existence. It thence supports the proposition, 
    mentioned early on, that any serious examination of the issues of 
    our continental underdevelopment which ignores the serious creative 
    literary inputs of those members of Africa's cultural society 
    misses the most altruistic and useful insights into remedying 
    present African political and economic conditions.
Although some of best chapters of modern African writing have 
    been written in the works of our septuagenarians - an assertion as 
    factual as their most elegant and determined past struggles to 
    shove off the colonial yoke that bedevilled and impoverished our 
    world -today's 
    literati must not suffer the lack of direction and discretion that 
    modern African leaders display in their political, economic and 
    cultural imitation of Europe and America to the amusement and 
    contempt of the rest of the world.
Thus by allowing the essay "Bards and Tyrants" to 
    stand for the title of the whole collection, I have nearly 
    acquiesced to a pedestrian journalese that inscribes Africa's 
    fate as sorely torn in two opposing and irremediable directions 
    charted by her bards and petty tyrants. One includes members of a 
    visionary literati who seek to elevate the potentials of their 
    educational and cultural inheritance. They stand against the daft 
    and vulgar politics of tyrannosaurs who hasten to complete the 
    devolution of their continent in a state of complete and total 
    degeneracy. It is the frightening prospect of this latter 
    possibility that all partakers in contemporary African writing 
    should, and must, confront in any real or imagined, personal or 
    corporate, endeavour.
