Seeking support for mission work
IN the 18th and 19th century, missionary work used to be 
    characterised by comfortable life in Western countries such as 
    England and other parts of Europe. Then, to heed to the call was 
    considered a revered service. Until things were reverted to 
    missionaries having to serve in the jungles of Africa, and many 
    losing their lives to various diseases or hostilities of the 
    villagers, missionary calls was desirable.
Today, the tide is changing. Now, once you become a missionary, 
    it is almost at your own peril because the supports that used to 
    come from missionary societies such as Christ Missionary Society 
    (CMS), Baptist and Methodist organisations are no longer sufficient 
    to cater for the survival of the scores of missionaries spread 
    across the continent. Yet, it was to the credit of the early years 
    missionaries that majority of Africans were able to turn to Christ, 
    away from their primitive lifestyle.
"Sadly so, missionary work is becoming an awful life 
    of loneliness," said Reverend David Hinderer who was 
    the first missionary to visit Ibadan.
On one hand, the British government was reported to be more 
    interested in the palm produce and the vast natural resources of 
    Nigeria than spreading the gospel. Hence, their fund, which once 
    used to be regular, were no longer forthcoming.
Now, in the 21st century, the situation is not getting any 
    better. The sorry state of missionaries all over the country, with 
    thousands forgotten in remote villages and scattered across the 
    country living with strangers and winning souls for Christ, 
    "Our only source of joy is seeing people give their 
    lives to Christ," said a missionary that would not 
    give his name.
For Pastor Samuel Adebayo, when the suffering became rather 
    tough, he took to selling firewood and involved himself in other 
    menial jobs to sustain himself and his family in the absence of 
    expected support.
"The traditional chief, Baale, of the mission field where I 
    am based was always against me because we don’t contribute money 
    for their sacrifice. They had tried to kill us; but were not 
    successful instead someone was killed at the back of my house and 
    laid false allegations against me that I was the murderer. But 
    thank God that I was eventually acquitted," he said.
Pastor Adebayo who was called into mission work in Alabidun 
    village, Ona-Ara local government, Oyo State in 2002 continued: 
    "Another challenge is feeding. There was always a battle 
    whenever we want to eat. Mission work is not an easy task due to 
    the challenges which could be physical or spiritual."
For the Liaison officer, Nigeria Evangelical Missions (NEMA) 
    representative in Lagos State, Pastor Edward Dooga when it comes to 
    missionary having family, marriage is a major issue. "It was 
    difficult for a young man anchored with missionary responsibilities 
    and good prospects in life to get a wife. Most of the fine girls 
    refused because they felt I could not earn a living from what I was 
    doing and I in return was not ready to leave the mission field for 
    anything.
"But even in the mission field after the resignation, this 
    young girl, refering to his wife, Mrs. Mimi Deborah 
    Edwards-Dooga, found me as her ‘angel’ 
    that was sent by God. Aside this, there are many other challenges 
    which include needs and conflicts but they are not challenges as 
    far as God’s will to win souls is accomplished."
According to him, "family acceptance is another big 
    challenge for them as missionaries. He said: "My first and 
    foremost challenge was my family who were Catholic. When I told 
    them of my missionary ambition, they felt giving my life to Christ 
    was just an indirect way of changing churches so my mother most 
    especially opposed the vision.
"Things became unbearable when I was travelling to Ghana. 
    My mother said to me ‘if you are truly my son, you won’t go on this 
    mission trip.’ I replied her that "I was truly her son and 
    would still go for the trip."
Dooga, who started mission work in 1982, said if people are 
    wondering why they refuse to give up against all odds, his response 
    is: "Mission work is non-negotiable. It is not by choice. It 
    is what we Christians live for. This is the sole reason why we have 
    the church on earth. It is the reason for our being born-again and 
    still remain on the face of the earth and not taken to heaven 
    immediately.
"Mission is everything God has given the church. But the 
    church has decided to rather embezzle the church at the expense of 
    God’s mission. Even as the church has sufficient resources to 
    accomplish mission work, enough to do missions in Nigeria, yet the 
    church is not doing so. It is not that the church does not want to 
    do it but they don’t understand how it should be done," he 
    said.
Pastor Sunday Bakare, whose mission field is in Ogunronbi, an 
    interior part of Ogun state, his is a gory tale. For a man that has 
    been involved in missionary activities for almost 
    10years, he is meant to be 
    happy but his plight won’t allow that.
Bakare, from a Muslim background called to the missionary work 
    said: "Others don’t know that the number of people in the 
    rural areas are more than the people out there. They prefer their 
    conducive environment, tithes and to build kingdoms for themselves 
    all under the umbrella of offices and forget their fellow brethren 
    in the rural setting." He got involved with mission work 
    through the drama ministry as a stage director with other 
    mission-minded people with a focus on ministration, evangelism, and 
    intercession.
Presently, Bakare’s situation is highly pathetic as he feeds his 
    family virtually from hand-to-mouth. He said: "We hardly have 
    the normal three-square meals to eat. We drink highly contaminated 
    water. We have no electricity and no employment 
    opportunities." He added: "When I arrived at Ogunrobi 
    village, life was extremely difficult for me. I’ll go into the bush 
    to get fruits which I used as breakfast. Lunch is not always 
    available and at night we eat whatever is available; and our dinner 
    is actually tagged ‘God will provide’.
Away from all the tales, support have began to come the way of 
    the missionaries even though it might be considered insignificant 
    compared to the numbers of the missionaries and the magnitude of 
    the work they are doing.
A media Christian group called Journalists for Christ (JFC), 
    which often makes out the time to visit missionaries in the remote 
    villages in order to identify with them and give some support 
    towards aiding the works of the servants of God, recently paid one 
    of such suprise visits to a 
    mission field.
During a visit to one of the sites recently, National 
    Coordinator, JFC, Mr. Lekan Otufodunrin said "Mission 
    work is not only for the man on the field, but also anybody who is 
    supporting the work in one way or another."
Also, Mission House International, a Christian ministry 
    dedicated to taking the gospel of Jesus Christ to the remaining 
    unreached people and groups, headed by Tor Uja, is another 
    minstry calling for support.
Uja said: "The missionaries we are sending forth are made 
    up a chunk of the missionaries in this country; but support from 
    other organisations has been slow; hence, we believe that this is 
    drawing back this important work of God."
