Adeyemi’s Art Odyssey
He wanted to become a medical doctor. His father treasured that 
    profession and wished he became one. But fate had something 
    different in store for him and today, he is happy he settled for a 
    career that holds a lot of passion for him. Meet Kunle Adeyemi, art 
    scholar and authority in printmaking and painting. Adeyemi’s love 
    for the arts is consuming. No wonder, he is widely celebrated for 
    his immense contribution to the growth of the industry and after 25 
    years of professional practice, the highly revered artist is not 
    ready to relent but rather intensify efforts at moving the industry 
    forward.
Fifty years is always considered a landmark that often called 
    for revelry. Adeyemi chose a different kind of celebration – 
    holding an exhibition to showcase his creative works from his body 
    of works over the years.
For him, commemorating his birthday with an exhibition is a 
    milestone and something to thank God about. “As an art scholar, 
    fifty years of existence, which this exhibition is commemorating, 
    is a milestone, particularly when one is on the verge of the second 
    half of a life’s game judging by the biblical time of three scores 
    and ten.”
The solo exhibition which opens today at the Ikoyi-based 
    Quintessence gallery will no doubt, unleash the creative ingenuity 
    in Adeyemi’s works shaped by his thoughts and cultural milieu.
With over 13 solo exhibitions and over 30 group exhibitions 
    within and outside the country, this exhibition highlights the 
    artist’s affinity with nature and documents events as they 
    unfolds.
His recent workshop and exhibition in Sweden has also influenced 
    his style positively and thus making his works new and distinctive. 
    His works includes deep etching, serigraphy, with influences from 
    his Yoruba tradition.
At the opening of the exhibition today, Adeyemi will present 
    over 35 works which include Ancestral Mask, Wheel of Fortune, 
    Bountiful Harvest, Praise God, Fragment of Tradition, and the 
    Village Square amongst others. Mask of Honour represents the fact 
    that masks are the windows through which the world sees Africa. The 
    concept of masks, he explained is about festivity and celebration 
    “This works were made to actually document the African tradition 
    for posterity.” Fragment of Tradition he further explained is to 
    let people know how elders in the society are recognized.
At the preview of the works last week, the artist revealed that 
    the exhibition is significant in the sense that it offers him a 
    platform to fully transform his thoughts and perceptions into a 
    vision of what he believes art should be.
Culture and environment plays important role in Adeyemi’s works 
    and he believes that reflection of culture and past experiences 
    coupled with a constant desire to pursue new ideas has yielded 
    rewarding creative harvest. “My works thus reveal my passion for 
    artistic exploration of the world around me. The present level of 
    my work is characterized by semi-abstraction with images becoming 
    more complex through the free use of other elements making the 
    recent works more qualitative in thematic, stylistic and formal 
    rendition,” he added.
Adeyemi who received tutelage from renowned art masters like 
    Professor Yusuf Grillo, Bruce Onabrakpeya, S. I Wagboje, Dan 
    Ikhu Omovbude and Dr. Fowowe among others, has been 
    variously described by friends and associates as a bridge builder, 
    tireless listener and a very creative artist. In the words of Oshin 
    Ademola of the National Gallery of Art, Lagos, Adeyemi’s skills can 
    be compared to those of the masters. “His unquenchable quest for 
    knowledge no doubt is one of the reasons the art world is 
    experiencing dramatic changes in his styles.”
One positive aspect of Adeyemi that many art stakeholders often 
    cite is his philanthropic nature. “We admire his philanthropic 
    nature. Two years ago, after his exhibition in our gallery, he 
    donated several of his works to the Federal Orthopaedic Hospital, 
    Igbobi,” Moses Ohiomokhare, Curator Quintessence gallery said. He 
    added: “This year, to celebrate his fifty years on earth, he is 
    offering scholarship to some students and launching his book.”
“Kunle Adeyemi takes care of other peoples problems more as 
    priority than his own financially or otherwise,” Adeyoro a 
    Professor of Industrial Design and Visual Arts said of Adeyemi.
Indeed, Adeyemi has since the beginning of his career 
    synthesized painting and printmaking. He is one artist that 
    believes in style identification and the fact that mono-style can 
    actually be disadvantageous. Not only that, the talented artist and 
    lecturer at the Yaba College of Technology, admires and cherish 
    variety.
Adeyemi is dynamic in his usage of materials and his techniques 
    and compositional arrangement are balanced. Titled Dispatches from 
    My Art, the exhibition, which is Adeyemi’s third solo exhibition in 
    Quintessence gallery will no doubt give the gallery some refreshing 
    ambience. The event will also be used to launch his book tilted, 
    New Wine.
His journey into the creative world began many years ago and 
    since then he has been able to blend the Yaba style with 
    traditional arts of Benin and Yoruba perfectly well.
Describing his works as a revelation of cultural practices, Tola 
    Wewe, Ondo State commissioner of culture and tourism said, “his 
    works tell stories of past and present generations. Adeyemi 
    narrates history through creative designs and his intelligent use 
    of motifs aptly describes the maturity he has gained overtime.”
No doubt, Adeyemi has contributed immensely to the growth of art 
    in Nigeria. He has not only been involved in the training of 
    students through various workshops, he also recorded giant strides 
    during his tenure as chairman of the Society of Nigeria Artists, 
    Lagos State.
At 50, the artist says there is so much yet to be done. “Some 
    dreams are unfulfilled but I thank God for how far he has taken me 
    because there is so much ahead.”
The art scholar believes that art has given so much to the 
    country and that the government has not reciprocated this in the 
    art industry.
He therefore urged the government to look inwards and create a 
    conducive atmosphere for the arts to thrive. “Arts is supposed to 
    be registered in all parts in the country,” he said urging the 
    government to be serious with the National Endowment Fund for the 
    arts. “The government should be serious with the Endowment Fund for 
    the arts. The government should be disposed to the arts and 
    properly educate the populace about this.”
For the upcoming artists, Adeyemi has this to say: “You must be 
    sincere in whatever you are doing. There is much to be achieved in 
    this country. They should be hard working and look at what they 
    should offer the country and not necessarily what the country 
    should do for them.”
