Artistic ideals of Araism
Recently, Mufu Onifade and his band of followers mounted an art 
    exhibition at the Mydrim gallery, Ikoyi, Lagos entitled 
    Araism Movement 5. Since 1996, Mufu, an artist 
    of no mean stature has been experimenting with 
    Araism , an art movement which 
    he founded to propagate the ideals of the visual art technique.
The ideals of Araism has often been centred 
    on techniques rather than style. And it is for this that Mufu has 
    been able to move on ahead in his constant quest to find an art 
    form and expression not just for himself but also for those who 
    believe in him and what he stands for.
In that exhibition which further helped to entrench the hold of 
    Araism on the art movement in Nigeria, the 
    public was privileged to witness the emergence of more artists who 
    have deemed it fit to be apostles of Araism. 
    Each of the artists was able to find his/her true expressive voice 
    with the art forms so presented. In one of his works titled 
    ‘Iroke’ which was acrylic on canvas, 
    Mufu demonstrated his full conviction that like a jingle bell, 
    Iroke produces that very peculiar sound that sends a signal of 
    clarity to the vision that Orunmila has so often revealed to 
    mankind. A unique work of immense appeal and conviction Iroke 
    reinforces the devotees’ faith and also very powerfully delivers 
    divine message which hinges essentially on the terrain of 
    sacredness and spirituality.
It is a work that is best understood and appreciated by true art 
    lovers and those who can be at home with the ideals of Orunmila. 
    Mufu also has other works in place. These include Sango’s Harem and 
    Awelewa which means African 
    beauty. All these works hover extensively on the import 
    of Araism which has deeper appeals than most 
    ordinary eyes can decode. This goes to show how carried away Mufu 
    has been in his love for this movement, technique and form.
Also from Oludotun Popoola came Arewa (Beauty within), 
    Aajo Laye (The return), 
    and Igara all of which dwelt on the total concept of Araism. In 
    Igara Popoola defines the heart of a journey man. To him this work 
    truly transcends ethnicity or immediate environment. This work has 
    a cluster of buildings typical of a compound in the Igara area of 
    Edo state. And once this type of contraption is in place the heart 
    of man glows in appreciation of what he has been able to conceive 
    and achieve. With a good colour blending and application, Popoola 
    carefully presented a typical rural settlement where man is in full 
    bloom and where his peace of mind is never in doubt. A good natural 
    setting truly gives a man a big boost to conquer the world. This is 
    what Igara has set out to achieve as presented by the artist.
In his own presentation, Jonathan Ikpoza showcased 
    Ketekete (Horse rider), 
    Ile Lati Ko eso rode (Charity begins from home), 
    Obowonkori (The Sower). Each work 
    defines human actions and activities in different forms and folds. 
    It shows an artist who is at home with the ideals of the society 
    and what the people stand for. Without the human form, the earth 
    itself is void. This is what Ikpoza depicts in most of his works 
    especially in the Sower which is a work rich in human ideals.
There were 14 artists in all. And each artist presented a 
    coterie of works that showed there is depth in Araism. The only 
    female artist among them named Esther Ayodeji Emmanuel was quite 
    outstanding. In her statement she agrees that "Looking beyond 
    the horizon reveals the true identity of artistic expression". 
    This can be seen more clearly in sleeping on duty in the atmosphere 
    of commerce. Of course whatever happens the body ought to be given 
    enough time for rest. However, when a duty is overstretched, there 
    is always a reversion to pay back time.
In all, the works are all very expressive, deep and evocative, 
    with immense appeals to the soul. It is even hoped that with this 
    that the ideals of Araism technique, which has come this far to 
    fashion a different way for the visual art profession not just in 
    Nigeria but beyond.
