‘A passion for embossing art’
For a long time, embossing art in Nigeria seemed to have gone 
    into oblivion. But there are signs that soon the popularity which 
    this aspect of visual art once generated in these climes will be 
    back.
Mrs. Bola Oyetunji as one of the artists who loves and 
    specialises in embossing art has come into the art world with one 
    purpose in mind: to promote and protect embossing art. "I do 
    art, metal embossing art. Yes I am a professional artist, yes I can 
    say I am even though I was not formally trained as an artist. I am 
    not a university trained artist. But for the type of work I do, I 
    was, of course, trained for it. I started my training in South East 
    Asia, precisely in Brunei where I was on international posting with 
    my husband. My husband was with Shell and when we were in Brunei, 
    there was a certain woman who volunteered to teach us some aspects 
    of the arts. You know, just to keep women busy, then, the need for 
    the arts and Grafts workshop came up. And because I had been in 
    love with arts, it was for me an opportunity to be part of the 
    workshop. For me everything made with the hands appeal to me. It 
    was while at the training that I was exposed to metal embossing, 
    copper thrilling, flower making. 
    batik, dress making and so on."
This training in 1982, thereafter helped to prepare Oyetunji for 
    the tasks ahead. Even though she has a Higher National Diploma 
    (HND) in Health Records, what got her moving ahead was the 
    background she got from her mother. "Although my mother was 
    not educated, she loved the art so much. I grew up to see her with 
    some tattoos on her body. And I would then say oh, mama loves the 
    work of arts."
With this background, Oyetunji then plunged herself deep into 
    the work of art, that today she has established her own art 
    gallery. It is called Baroyet Art Gallery located at 12, Odozi 
    Street, Ojodu, Lagos. According to her, "this is to show my 
    total love for the art and to also make art popular in this part of 
    Lagos State. When I started a lot of people said, how can you get 
    patronage at Ojodu? It is not the home for art in Lagos. But I 
    said, someone has to start it and this is what I have chosen to 
    do," she explained.
In addition to all these, she has undergone art training at 
    Pratt Fine Arts Centre in Seattle, Washington State, United States 
    of America. She also has a diploma in Fashion and Textile Designs 
    which enables her as a professional to concentrate more on interior 
    decoration, metal embossing and other things. Over the years, the 
    art in her has encouraged her to participate in many group art 
    exhibitions where her works had been outstanding, colourful and 
    unique.
Oyetunji has equally joined the appropriate professional bodies 
    in order to further home her art. These include The Society of 
    Nigeria Artists (SNA), Arts Zero Group, Gallery Owners Association 
    of Nigeria, among others. This has also helped her to intensity her 
    efforts to draw people’s attention to the art as a means of making 
    money and creating job opportunities for the people. In the latest 
    art exhibition which she organized and hosted, Oyetunji entitled it 
    ; Home Grown, to draw attention to the 
    prime place of embossing art in Nigeria.
Said she, "embossing art has been an age long art 
    especially in the Asian and Western world. The talent to pioneer a 
    movement that will be a legacy for the future generations lies in 
    our determination to take embossing art to the next level in the 
    history of Nigeria using mainly copper sheet. There are wide ranges 
    of optional designs spanning cultural, religious themes, 
    wild life and floral with 
    satisfaction in any size required. The golden colour of copper 
    sheet when embossed gives designed works the 
    shinning and unique beauty that 
    makes them 100 per cent acceptable as corporate gifts souvenirs, 
    photo frames, award plaques which can be customized with minimum 
    length of delivery times."
Oyetunji whose works often distinguish her from the rest, went 
    on to say, "this distinctive look of embossed arts also 
    enhances the beauty of homes and offices. This makes the produced 
    artworks a bonafide piece to be owned by individuals and corporate 
    entities. So it is my concern and commitment to introduce embossed 
    artworks into every home, office and other establishments where 
    modern artworks are needed," she stated, smiling 
    satisfactorily.
