Badagry remembers slave route
Today, slavery becomes a topic for areas affected with 
    one of history’s inhumanity. Badagry, one of the slave ports that 
    dot the West African coast plans big. Joe Agbro Jr. reports
Every August 23rd, for the past ten years, the horrors of 
    slavery has been replayed in what many consider as one of the 
    hideous sins of man’s humanity to man. And in what has become a 
    ritual, the people of Badagry, Lagos are set to mark the turbulent, 
    disruptive, and crisis-ladened times of the slave trade, which 
    history records dislocated not less than 15 million Africans from 
    their ancestral homes.
This year’s celebration, for the people of Badagry is in honour 
    of the pop legend, Michael Joseph Jackson who passed on in July. 
    Slave trade was finally abolished in Badagry on 18th March 1852, 
    but the scars are still there. The Gberefun point of no return is 
    an example, and the slave market, and the slave route
It was on the night of August 22nd 1791 through the morning of 
    the next day on the Island of Santo Domingo that an uprising marked 
    the beginning of the abolition of the transatlantic slave trade. 
    The significance of the date is one that is not lost on the black 
    race which has suffered most from slavery. And it was for this that 
    the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
    Organisation (UNESCO) declared August 23rd every year as 
    International Day For The 
    Rememberance Of The Slave Trade And Its Abolition.
Following a sequence of events, the Egun 
    people, the dominant tribe of Badagry have claimed Michael Jackson 
    as one of their sons who was sold into slavery through the 
    ‘point-of-no-return’. But, when asked 
    how it was confirmed that Jackson indeed originated from Badagry, 
    the Senior Special Adviser on Tourism to the Chairman, Badagry 
    Local Government, Prince Yomi Ajose put western science to the 
    background, and relied on African science.
In October, 1996, Ajose visited Michigan, USA for an African 
    World Expo. There, he met Mayor Gary Loster and was introduced to 
    Marlon Jackson. But, it was not until last year, 
    . Ajose said, when Marlon Jackson 
    had earlier visited the slave route on March 7th, 2008, he was so 
    moved that he ‘felt’ this had to be the 
    place he came from. "I have a feeling I am from here," 
    Ajose reported Malon as saying. Subsequently, the Ifa Oracle was 
    consulted and it was found out that 
    that the Jackson family came from Badagry. And ‘Ajaneson’, from a Vothun Priest 
    family which bears that name.
Hence, it is based on Marlon’s sense of 
    de javu and Ifa divinations that 
    the 2009 ceremony sponsored by the Badagry Local Government, 
    Tourism Arts and Culture Network, Badagry (TACnet), African 
    Renaissance Foundation (AREFO), Ijinla Arts and Tours, and the 
    Motherland Group LLC holds. The Motherland group which has Marlon 
    Jackson, Gary Loster
The theme of this year’s celebration is ‘Family 
    Re-union’. Scheduled to hold between August 21st and 
    29th, there will be picnics, symposia, speeches and dramas. On the 
    22nd, there would be a candlelight procession to mark the 1791 
    night of revolt, Vothun Festival at Ajara, African Arts exhibition, 
    Zamgbetto Festival, Boat Reggata, and the final burial rites for 
    the repose of the soul of Michael Jackson. It is paradoxical that 
    Michael Jackson was planning to come and perform at Badagry before 
    his death.
For the burial rites, a chief priest of Vothun, Chief Zannu 
    Awhanvoyetho said Jackson’s yoko (earth taken 
    from his grave) would be taken and brought to Badagry to be rested 
    in his yoho, (the building where the earth would 
    be committed). Other rites would then be performed. And Ajose said, 
    permission for this has been asked and granted by the Jackson 
    family.
The Motherland Group has commenced the building of a museum 
    where memorabilia of Michael Jackson will be stored.
