When female folks crave for God…
Every female has got her worth, valor and dignity. She is meant 
    to be an epitome of exemplary character in the society and a role 
    model for all and sundry, thus, standing as a point of reference to 
    her peers and even to the male folks. But the main reason why most 
    go astray is because they loose 
    their concentration over any glimpse of distraction.
These distractions could be physical, spiritual, academical as 
    well as emotional. They all stand as hindrance to the good plans of 
    God for our life and might unfortunately deprive us as female from 
    winning the heart of our creator – God.
All requires a two step partnership with God. Humans’ part is to 
    stop and acknowledge God along the way, while God’s part definitely 
    is to direct our paths and make them straight.
According to this teens guide to friends of faith in form of a 
    book, A Young Woman after God’s Own Heart, it 
    tries straighten the fat that all 
    human are all consultants with God regarding their decision, word, 
    thought and response. For becomes a consultant to every human case 
    filed before him, for his peaceful co-existence with his 
    creator.
A young woman after God’s own heart
is not a book with restrictions in the area of sex, age, colour 
    or even ethnic group but it is so diversified that one can note 
    that must of the issues deliberated 
    upon are strictly issues that affect human, both young and old.
Just like the biblical David who is regarded as a man after 
    God’s own heart, the author of this book elaborates on the reason 
    why a female should be after God’s heart as this she describes 
    would gladden God’s heart and in return make her more than a 
    conqueror in all of her plans, aspirations and endeavours in 
    life.
Nevertheless, even as one is left with the rhetorical question 
    of whether the author decided to side line the male folks from this 
    book, the answer is not far fetched as it is a clear way that since 
    a female has been described as a man’s companion so the male folks 
    can find it handy in helping their wives manage their own life.
With an attractive cover which have faces of women; black and 
    white as well as the decorations. It implies that the book is no 
    respecter of colour, race, tribe or physique but all it is after is 
    correcting people’s mindset about God and good communication 
    rapport with people around our territorial boundaries.
Fortunately, the book was edited well, leaving little or no 
    flaws in the area of grammar, syntax, spelling and punctuation and 
    language usage, this, inversely, attracts the strength of the book 
    as one is not left to give answers to the question of if it was the 
    author’s way of defining male/female segregation.
By the time one reads this book extensively, one thing that is 
    likely to continue to ring a bell either as a man or a woman that 
    there is more to life than making others living it for you as a 
    woman. It shows that we are not weaker vessels but are meant to be 
    seekers of valour even in our meekness and most of all that if our 
    life, hearts, views, news, ideas, opinions and charisma are not 
    holy and pleasing before our creator then we are loosing the 
    position of being after God’s own heart.
The book talks elaborately on facts that surrounds strengthening 
    a lady’s passion and zeal to serving God and acknowledging him for 
    who he is and for his positive impartation in our lives as 
    individuals.
For someone like the author, Elizabeth it is a clear sign that 
    she has been able to train and manage her own as a mother and as a 
    working class woman.
One thing that the author was also able to do was to do justice 
    to elaborating how one can get close to God, enjoy meaningful 
    relationship with God and his people, making wise choices, becoming 
    spiritually strong, building a better future and also how one can 
    fulfill the desires of his 
    heart.
All these and many more according to the author would help in 
    understanding and following God’s perfect plan for our friendship, 
    faith, family relationship and the future.
