Still On the Fight against Polio
“I was against immunization before now, but I am ready to 
    campaign for it and I want every body to ensure that they immunized 
    their children,” said Mallam Abubakar of Limanchi Kona Zazzau in 
    Zaria Local government in Kaduna State. Abubakar's son was 
    afflicted with polio in 2008 after he had earlier refused to submit 
    the child for routine immunization.
Mallam Mukhtar Sani from the same area whose daughter Saratu 
    also suffers from polio due to non-compliance also said, “when her 
    sickness started, we were unable to sleep because we did not know 
    what the case was until it was diagnosed at the hospital as polio. 
    We were earlier told by somebody in our community to refuse 
    immunizing her.
“She has been treated and given drugs and is now able to walk 
    intermittently for a short distance, but not as she used to walk 
    before. I implore all of us to embrace immunization and ensure that 
    our children are all immunized,” he said in Hausa language, when 
    journalists, health officials from World Heath Organisation (WHO) 
    and those from Kaduna State Action Community on Immunization (SACI) 
    visited his area on a polio sensitisation campaign.
This new awareness that is gradually spreading among the people 
    that hitherto, were staunchly opposed to any form of immunization 
    for their children, based on the advised of some of their 
    traditional and religious leaders, is as a result of efforts of 32 
    journalists in Kaduna who were concerned about how children were 
    continually being paralysed for life due to their parents refusal 
    to submit their children for immunization.
The journalists decided to come together under the auspices of 
    Journalists Against Polio (JAP), for the purpose of creating more 
    awareness on why people in Kaduna State and the north as a whole 
    need to produce their children for immunization. Their aim also 
    includes exposing government officials who only pay lip service to 
    the fight against polio and encouraging those genuinely fighting 
    it.
The devastation that polio has wrecked in Nigeria and Kaduna 
    State in particular is best imagined. The scary aspect of the polio 
    virus is that for every child that becomes infected, 200 other 
    children are immediately at risk of contacting it due to the highly 
    contagious nature of the virus that easily spread through 
    human-to-human contact. In endemic areas, wild polioviruses can 
    infect virtually the entire human population of that area according 
    to experts. They also added that the time between first exposure 
    and first symptoms, known as the incubation period is usually six 
    to 20 days, with a maximum range of three to 35 days.
Virus particles are excreted in the feces for several weeks 
    following initial infection. The disease is transmitted primarily 
    by ingesting contaminated food or water. It is occasionally 
    transmitted via the oral-oral route, a mode especially visible in 
    areas with good sanitation and hygiene. Polio is most infectious 
    between seven to ten days before and seven to ten days after the 
    appearance of symptoms, but transmission is possible as long as the 
    virus remains in the saliva or feces.
Nigeria, which presently accounts for 90 per cent of world polio 
    virus, has been trying for years to eradicate polio without 
    success, no thanks to certain groups of people who have vowed not 
    to allow their children to be immunized, especially in the north. 
    The situation has equally not been helped by mischievous health 
    workers who, while giving the impression of supporting the 
    exercise, sabotage it at every opportunity that presents itself, 
    resulting in Nigeria even being accused of re-infecting 
    neighbouring African countries that had initially eradicated the 
    virus.
Poliomyelitis, often called polio or infantile paralysis, a 
    dreadful childhood disease, has existed quietly for thousand of 
    years as an endemic pathogen until the 1880s when major epidemic of 
    it started appearing around parts of the world with deaths in 
    hundred of thousand, especially in cities during heat period. It is 
    an acute viral infection that is quickly spread and has been 
    paralysing and killing children since the epidemic started years 
    ago. The virus in an infected person makes him or her exhibit 
    different symptoms when the virus enters the blood stream.
In some cases where the virus enters the central nervous system, 
    it destroys the motor neurons, leading to muscle weakness and acute 
    flaccid paralysis. Different types of paralysis occur depending on 
    the nerves involved. Spinal polio is the most common which is 
    characterised by paralysis of the legs. The deaths from polio 
    finally reduced to around a thousand a year when Jonas Salk in 1952 
    and Albert Sabin in 1962 developed the polio vaccines. The virus 
    after so many years has been eradicated in 126 countries with the 
    exception of Nigeria, India, Afghanistan and Pakistan.
The statistics for the whole of Nigeria and Kaduna State gives 
    ample evidence that Nigeria needs to do more before the virus can 
    be totally eradicated from the country as the numbers of recorded 
    cases keeps rising. In 2002 Nigeria had 202 cases; 2003, 355 cases; 
    2004, 782 cases which rose in 2005 to 830 cases, while 2006 was the 
    worst year for Nigeria with 1,122 cases. It drop to 285 in 2007 and 
    then shot up in 2008 to 803 cases. Despite all efforts, 2009 
    already point to a high number if more effort is not injected as 98 
    cases have already been recorded in 21 states as at March 20. This 
    makes the intervention of JAP, in addition to other stakeholders 
    more important and timely.
In Kaduna State, the story isn't any better. The state has 
    the fourth highest cases of the virus with 49 in 2008, while Kano 
    with 273 cases has the highest rate in the country, followed by 
    Zamfara 85, Katsina with 82 and Bauchi in third position with 
    56.
Interestingly, while the national statistics of the polio virus 
    is almost completely concentrated in the northern region, the same 
    situation is also witnessed in Kaduna State as almost all the 15 
    local governments where the virus has affected children in 2008, 
    are located in the northern part of the state, with Zaria local 
    Government topping the list with nine cases followed by Igabi and 
    Ikara local governments with six each. Already eight cases in seven 
    local governments in the state have been recorded in 2009.
JAP took up the fight against polio because since the routine 
    immunization of the Oral Polio Vaccine exercise started, Kaduna 
    State has never achieved more than 49 per cent coverage due to so 
    many challenges. These include inadequate monitoring and 
    supervision, inadequate immunization centres and sessions. This 
    particular issue is important because out of the 1,115 Primary 
    Health Care facilities in Kaduna State, only 627 of the centre 
    provide routine immunization services.
There is also the problem of dearth of qualified primary 
    healthcare staff, which is not help by the quality of some of the 
    ad-hoc staff periodically engaged for the routine immunization. A 
    case was told of an immunization officer who together with those on 
    his team, while on routine immunization in villages, dug up the 
    ground and buried the vaccines. He then come back with his team to 
    report that the coverage in their assigned area was 100 per cent 
    complete, until the day, somebody in his group, not comfortable 
    with what they were doing confessed it.
Most of them whose children eventually become affected with the 
    polio virus after refusing to have them immunized, revealed that it 
    was done out of ignorance because their 'leaders' told them that the immunization 
    vaccines is an American ploy to ensure that all children that 
    receives the oral vaccine instantly becomes 
    sterile- incapable of giving 
    birth.
The sterility, the were told, will enable Americans to be the 
    only ones that will be giving birth thereby becoming stronger and 
    stronger in their quest to dominate Africans and Muslims. Others 
    said they were told that the vaccines contained some fluid taken 
    out of pork meat which could defile them. Another problem which was 
    highlighted by Dr. Emmanuel Musa, the state coordinator of 
    WHO in Kaduna showed that some community leaders still demand 
    monetary reward from health officials as a condition for supporting 
    immunization activities in their communities.
Explaining why JAP was formed in the first place, the 
    group's chairman, Mr. Kunle Sanni, in one of their 
    rural sensitisation campaign said “journalists Against Polio was 
    formed by journalists of like minds with the aim of contributing 
    their quota to the fight against polio and other child killer 
    diseases in the country.
An interesting issue is that the sensitization campaign of JAP 
    which recently opened chapters in Sokoto, Kano, Jigawa, Bauchi and 
    FCT, has caught even the attention of Bill Gates, owner of 
    Microsoft and founder of Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. Gates 
    whose foundation has committed over $7billion since 2000 to global 
    fight against polio, malaria, respiratory problems, meningitis, 
    diarrhea, measles and other child killer diseases, reportedly urged 
    the media to wake up to its duty as the public watch dog so as to 
    help stamp out polio and other child killer diseases from 
    Nigeria.
The Programme Officer of Global Health Advocacy which is under 
    the Bill and Mellinda Gates 
    Foundation, Mrs Melissa Derry, while meeting with JAP in Abuja when 
    Gates came, said, “I am impressed and happy to hear about a 
    body called Journalists Initiatives Against Polio and for 
    Immunization (JAP). It is interesting to know that journalists are 
    directly involved in fighting against the crippling disease. It 
    would be an incredible milestone to achieve the eradication of 
    polio in Nigeria.”
Executive Director of National Primary Healthcare Development 
    Agency (NPHCDA), Dr. Mohammed Pate, while meeting with the 
    group recently, commanded them, adding that “the eradication of 
    polio which has afflicted and crippled hundreds of Nigerian youths 
    can only be achieved through genuine commitment by all 
    stakeholders, not through setting of deadlines by government as 
    some of the factors involved are not within the authority of 
    government.”
