How to get rid of sugar overload in the body (Sugar 
    detox)
If you’re run-down, overweight, or moody, you could be suffering 
    from sugar overload. Our expert plan will help you get rid refined 
    sugar from your diet and still live a sweet life.
When you rely on sugary treats for a hit of energy during a dull 
    or jam-packed day, you’ll be guaranteed a bout of irritability when 
    the "high" fades. While sugar is a genuine addiction—eat 
    too much and your brain gets hooked on its own chemical surges, as 
    it would with any drug—it is possible to learn new habits, says 
    Kathleen DesMaisons, Ph.D., a specialist in addictive 
    nutrition and author of Potatoes Not Prozac 
    (Simon & Schuster, 2008).
Try these steps to end a sugar habit and regain control of your 
    moods. But go slowly, says DesMaisons, and remember that this is a 
    cumulative process. You’ll have better long-term success if you 
    give yourself at least two weeks to one month to adapt to each 
    change.
Getting sugar out of your diet
Eat breakfast with protein
Within 30 minutes of waking, have a meal with at least ten grams 
    of protein to stabilize your blood sugar. Scrambled eggs or tofu, 
    nut butters, and veggie sausage patties are all good options. Keep 
    a journal Note everything you 
    eat to help you become aware of how much sugar you’re eating and 
    when cravings occur. You’ll be less likely to slip into unconscious 
    sugar consumption.
Stop snacking
Eat three meals a day, on schedule and with protein. You can 
    still have small amounts of sugar of all types (even desserts), but 
    only with your meals. Eating a full meal helps slow sugar 
    delivery.
Take these supplements
To optimize your body’s ability to metabolize carbohydrates, 
    take vitamin B complex (50 mg), vitamin C (500 mg), and zinc (15 
    mg). Eat a potato every night 
    Although fairly high on the glycemic index, potatoes can combat 
    mood swings and sugar cravings, says DesMaisons. Eating a whole one 
    at night creates an insulin response that delivers the amino acid 
    tryptophan (a precursor to serotonin) to the brain.
Switch to brown foods
Sneak high-fiber whole grains into your diet—eat whole wheat 
    instead of white bread, brown rice not white—to help stabilize 
    blood sugar.
Cut down on sugar
Avoid all refined and sweetened foods such as cereals, candy, 
    packaged cookies, and presweetened beverages. Cut out sweet fruits 
    (bananas, kiwi, apples) and eat less-sweet fruits like berries, 
    instead.
Is sugar . . . Making you moody?
Look for these signs to see if you’re "sugar 
    sensitive," says Kathleen DesMaisons, Ph.D.
•Low-level anxiety or depression
•Frequent sugar-craving binges
•Withdrawal symptoms and irritability
The three types of sugar
GLUCOSE is the body’s main source of energy, mostly derived from 
    starchy foods like vegetables and grains.
Fructose helps the body store calories, found in fruits and 
    honey and other natural sweeteners like molasses, maple syrup, 
    honey, agave nectar, jaggery (unrefined palm sugar), and unrefined 
    cane sugar. These sources also contain trace amounts of minerals 
    and other nutrients. Too much fructose or refined sugar can lead to 
    high blood pressure, type 2 diabetes, or even cancer.
Galactose
occurs in dairy and breast milk.
Fructose
If it’s impossible to slim down despite your best efforts, your 
    problem may be fructose. This simple sugar occurs naturally in 
    fruits, sweet vegetables, and honey, but is also added as high 
    fructose corn syrup to most baked goods, drinks, sauces, and 
    prepackaged foods.
Recent studies have found that fructose very quickly turns into 
    body fat, in some cases never even yielding energy for the body to 
    use, says Richard Johnson, author of The Sugar 
    Fix (Rodale, 2008). Fructose also puts a damper on a 
    hormone called leptin, which signals our brain that we’re satiated 
    and it’s time to stop eating. To end your own sugar fix and lose 
    weight, follow this plan from Johnson:
Cut down on fructose
Start by avoiding high fructose corn syrup and table sugar. Look 
    for these in any processed food, including ketchup and other 
    condiments, sauces, salad dressings, jams, peanut butter, meat 
    products, and commercially produced desserts. Eat no more than 35 
    grams of fructose per day.
Say no to sugary drinks
Sodas are obviously out—12 ounces of cola has more than 20 grams 
    of fructose— but pay attention to juices. One eight-ounce serving 
    of orange juice has 10.7 g of fructose, cranberry juice can 
    have up to 13 g, and apple juice 16. Avoid smoothies, sweetened 
    coffee beverages, wine coolers, and any bottled drink that lists 
    high fructose corn syrup on the label. Stick to water, and 
    unsweetened coffee and tea, instead.
Eat some starch
Starchy foods (whole wheat pasta, potatoes, and even whole-grain 
    bread) may stay on the menu. They are rich in glucose, which 
    stimulates insulin release, "a normal and healthy 
    physiologic reaction," says Johnson.
Take care of yourself
Boost your metabolism with 30 minutes of exercise per day, 
    Johnson says. Get 10 to 15 minutes of sun twice a week for vitamin 
    D (your body makes it from sunshine), and 250 mg of vitamin C daily 
    for the antioxidants. Eat small amounts of dark chocolate on 
    occasion— it helps lower blood pressure.
Take the no-fructose challenge
Eating fructose triggers the body to produce more of the enzymes 
    that metabolize it, which leads to more cravings. You can break 
    this cycle by going cold turkey for two weeks. Skip sweetened food 
    and drinks, including desserts, fruit and fruit juice, even honey. 
    Read labels and don’t eat anything with high fructose corn syrup. 
    (You can still eat potatoes, pasta, rice, vegetables, meat, fish, 
    legumes, nuts, and cheese.) After two weeks, eat fructose in 
    moderation.
Is sugar . . . Making you fat (and sick)
Fructose is added to everything, says Johnson, and while it may 
    have helped our ancestors prepare for winter or famine, that need 
    no longer exists. Having too much fructose in your diet can set you 
    up for a cluster of health concerns that increase your risk of 
    heart disease and type 2 diabetes. Look for these symptoms and get 
    tested for the following:
•Excess weight, especially near your waist
•Low HDL or "good cholesterol"
•High blood glucose levels and/or insulin resistance
•High levels of triglycerides (energy stored in fat cells) in 
    your blood
Finding fructose
Johnson recommends eating less than 35 g of fructose a day, but 
    keeping track of it can be tricky. Here’s a handy list of 
    fructose-rich foods, excerpted from Johnson’s book, the sugar 
    fix:
Table sugar, 1 tablespoon 2.0
Pineapple, 1 slice 4.0
Molasses, 1 tablespoon 5.5
Granola, 1/2 cup 7.0
Banana, 1 medium 7.1
Raisin bran, 1 cup 7.6
Apple, medium 9.5
Watermelon, 1/4 melon 11.3
Grapes, seedless, 1 cup 12.4
Apple pie, 1 slice 16.5
Carrot cake, 1 slice 27.0
Chocolate cake, 1 slice 37.0
