Things that can go wrong with the male reproductive 
    system
Boys may sometimes experience reproductive system problems, 
    including:
Disorders of the Scrotum, Testicles, or 
    Epididymis
Conditions affecting the scrotal contents may involve the 
    testicles, epididymis, or the scrotum itself.
Testicular trauma.
Even a mild injury to the testicles can cause severe pain, 
    bruising, or swelling. Most testicular injuries occur when the 
    testicles are struck, hit, kicked, or crushed, usually during 
    sports or due to other trauma. Testicular torsion, when one of the 
    testicles twists around, cutting off its blood supply, is also a 
    problem that some teen males experience, although it’s not common. 
    Surgery is needed to untwist the cord and save the testicle.
Varicocele.
This is a varicose vein (an abnormally swollen vein) in the 
    network of veins that run from the testicles. Varicoceles commonly 
    develop while a boy is going through puberty. A varicocele is 
    usually not harmful, although it can damage the testicle or 
    decrease sperm production. Take your son to see his doctor if he is 
    concerned about changes in his testicles.
Testicular cancer.
This is one of the most common cancers in men younger than 40. 
    It occurs when cells in the testicle divide abnormally and form a 
    tumor. Testicular cancer can spread to other parts of the body, but 
    if it’s detected early, the cure rate is excellent. Teen boys 
    should be encouraged to learn to perform testicular 
    self-examinations.
Epididymitis
is inflammation of the epididymis, the coiled tubes that connect 
    the testes with the vas deferens. It is usually caused by an 
    infection, such as the sexually transmitted disease chlamydia, and 
    results in pain and swelling next to one of the testicles.
Hydrocele.
A hydrocele occurs when fluid collects in the membranes 
    surrounding the testes. Hydroceles may cause swelling in the 
    scrotum around the testicle but are generally painless. In some 
    cases, surgery may be needed to correct the condition.
Inguinal
hernia
. When a portion of the 
    intestines pushes through an abnormal opening or weakening of the 
    abdominal wall and into the groin or scrotum, it is known as an 
    inguinal hernia. The hernia may look like a bulge or swelling in 
    the groin area. It can be corrected with surgery.
Disorders of the Penis
Disorders affecting the penis include:
•Inflammation of the penis.
Symptoms of penile inflammation include redness, itching, 
    swelling, and pain. Balanitis occurs when the glans (the head of 
    the penis) becomes inflamed. Posthitis is foreskin inflammation, 
    which is usually due to a yeast or bacterial infection.
•Hypospadias.
This is a disorder in which the urethra opens on the underside 
    of the penis, not at the tip.
•Phimosis.
This is a tightness of the foreskin of the penis and is common 
    in newborns and young children. It usually resolves itself without 
    treatment. If it interferes with urination, circumcision (removal 
    of the foreskin) may be recommended.
•Paraphimosis.
This may develop when a boy’s uncircumcised penis is retracted 
    but doesn’t return to the unretracted position. As a result, blood 
    flow to the head of the penis may be impaired, and your son may 
    experience pain and swelling. A doctor may use lubricant to make a 
    small incision so the foreskin can be pulled forward. If that 
    doesn’t work, circumcision may be recommended.
•Ambiguous genitalia.
This occurs when a child is born with genitals that aren’t 
    clearly male or female. In most boys born with this disorder, the 
    penis may be very small or nonexistent, but testicular tissue is 
    present. In a small number of cases, the child may have both 
    testicular and ovarian tissue.
•Micropenis.
This is a disorder in which the penis, although normally formed, 
    is well below the average size, as determined by standard 
    measurements.
