Paediatrician alerts on gastroenteritis
Vomiting and diarrhea are common disease conditions which are 
    transmitted during the rainy season and mothers have been advised 
    to be on the alert for early identification of symptoms and present 
    their children for medical intervention without delay.
According to a consultant paediatrician at the Lagos University 
    Teaching Hospital (LUTH), Idi- Araba, Dr Edamisan Temiye, the 
    condition mentioned above is known as gastroenteritis and is highly 
    widespread during the wet season.
"During the rainy season, the virus that causes 
    gastroenteritis become more rampant in transmission, therefore a 
    lot of children come down with the disease. Children suffering from 
    this disease usually have mild fever followed by diarrhea and 
    vomiting. If not well managed the water loss may dehydrate the 
    child and will lead to death", he said.
Describing what could be done to arrest the situation in the 
    home he said: "The most important thing to do while the child 
    is vomiting and stooling is to replace what they have lost. It is 
    the amount of water and electrolyte (sodium, potassium, chloride 
    etc) which they have lost that may kill them. That is why the first 
    medical intervention we give them is water and oral re-hydration 
    support (ORS) to replace what has been lost.
"Sodium, potassium and chloride are used to balance the 
    body fluid and these are usually lost when children have diarrhea 
    coupled with vomiting and if they are not replaced adequately that 
    may cause problem. The basis of having oral re-hydration support 
    (ORS) which contains sodium, potassium and chloride is because of 
    this loss", he said
Dr Temiye said gastroenteritis is common but it is usually due 
    to presence of the virus which carries the disease during the 
    season, "What we have to do to prevent the disease is to live 
    in a clean environment always. This may help reduce the disease. 
    The disease may be contracted during the rainy season because of 
    run off water. Water can run from various areas into the stream. 
    When this water enters the stream it gets more contaminated.
"Malaria is quite common around this time of the year as 
    well and this gives room for mosquitoes to breed. Water collection 
    in broken pots, pure water sachets, discarded utensils like pots, 
    buckets, bottles and so on are natural enhancers for mosquitoes to 
    breed and to transmit malaria. Mosquitoes have time to breed when 
    the rain is starting and when it’s stopping".
He said there are some other things that are peculiar to the 
    season and have symptoms like gastroenteritis, "A child is 
    also bound to vomit and pass frequent stool if he has high fever. 
    It is not that they have gastroenteritis at that time; it is the 
    manifestation of malaria. This is common in some children when they 
    have malaria as they also vomit and pass frequent urine.
"Typhoid fever is yet another condition that may manifest 
    with the above symptoms. I believe that most diagnosis of the 
    disease that has been made is being made wrongly. In fact, some of 
    them are due to partially treated malaria or impartially treated 
    malaria. For instance, somebody may have malaria and it is a known 
    fact that the malaria that is being transmitted is resistant to 
    chloroquine. And we still see some doctors using chloroquine to 
    treat the disease when the Federal Government policy for now is to 
    rest chloroquine and use a combination of artesunate and other 
    drugs. So, it is a double drug that we are supposed to use. There 
    are some places where they are not obeying this directive, where 
    they keep to chloroquine. And when the patients are poorly treated, 
    especially children, vomiting and diarrhea are imminent."
The consultant said wrong diagnosis makes typhoid to be 
    protracted adding that most doctors are performing wrong tests.
"When somebody is having fever they jump at diagnosis of 
    typhoid when the actual illness is malaria. The test that they are 
    using to diagnose typhoid is a faulty test. The widal reaction 
    which is sent to widal test; is not the best to diagnose 
    typhoid."
