Cervical Cancer: Taming the Deadly Scourge
Women who gathered in Anthony Village, Lagos at the weekend 
    learnt a lot of things, one of which is to always subject 
    themselves to medical tests and screening to avoid diseases which 
    can be preventable when detected early, writes Davidson 
    Iriekpen.
Last year, a renowned Force Public Relations Officer and former 
    Kaduna State Commissioner of Police, Mr. Haz Iwendi 
    complained of minor discomfort on a Wednesday and by the following 
    Monday, he was dead after being in a coma for four days. In 
    Benin-City, capital of Edo State, a recent study of two hundred 
    senior executives, aged 25 to 64 showed that 70 per cent were 
    stunned to learn that they were hypertensive. Also, just about 
    every Nigerian is either related to, or knows someone who knows 
    someone who died suddenly from preventable illnesses and such 
    deaths are sadly, the surest indicator of reluctance to submit to 
    minor illnesses that are preventable with simple medication and 
    healthy lifestyle.
A medical check up is a thorough physical examination of the 
    body, including a variety of tests, depending on the age, sex and 
    medical history of the person. Undoubtedly, majority of Nigerians 
    do not undertake regular checks due to economic reason, ignorance 
    and reluctance to subject oneself to test.
The possibility of a medical check up crossing one's mind 
    when there is no illness is very rare. Most would rather indulge in 
    self-medication. People only live with the thought of money for 
    their daily bread, not for physicals, which they deem a waste of 
    money, especially if they seemed outwardly healthy. But who knows 
    of the festering diseases that 
    maybe lurking underneath? Gone are the days when robust 
    cheeks and potbellies are hallmarks of affluence because in spite 
    of the downturn in the economy, refined sugars, excess salt in 
    foods and careless lifestyle habits have been on the increase.
It is against this background that the Redeemed Christian Church 
    of God (RCCG) Morning Star Parish, Anthony Village, Lagos as part 
    of the activities marking its "Family Month", last week 
    organised a free cervical and breast cancer screening for women and 
    teenage girls in the church and other women in the community and 
    its environs. The screening and test, were not only aimed at making 
    the women folk know their status but sensitise them on the dangers 
    of the deadly scourge and the available methods of precautions.
In recent time, the two medical disorders especially cervical 
    cancer is fast gaining global attention. The disease is not only 
    causing anxiety among the old and middle aged women, but also among 
    the teenage population. Even the medical profession is yet to 
    demystify the cause of the sudden rapid scourge of the disease 
    which is today fast spreading in a manner never experienced 
    before.
Experts say cervical cancer is caused by Human Papilloma Virus 
    (HPV). It is a disease in which cancer cells are found in the 
    tissues of the cervix. The cervix is the opening of the uterus 
    (womb). The uterus is the hollow, pear-shaped organ where the baby 
    develops. The cervix connects the uterus to the vagina. Unlike 
    other cancerous ailments, the good thing about cervical cancer is 
    that it can be prevented if women take its vaccination. According 
    to them, though the disease is easily preventable if detected early 
    yet, there isn’t enough campaign to raise awareness about it in 
    Nigeria. In addition, research has revealed that most Nigerian 
    women are not well informed on why it is necessary to detect 
    cervical cancer when it is at its early stage.
In a study recently conducted by Dr. Gabriel Olabiyi Ogun 
    of the Department of Pathology, University College Hospital, Ibadan 
    and Ronald Bejide of the Department of Morbid Anatomy and Forensic 
    Pathology, Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife a plethora of 
    reasons were adduced to the high prevalence of this preventable 
    cancer in Nigeria. This is apart from the fact that 85 per cent of 
    the studied population demonstrated very poor knowledge and a 
    negative attitude of women in subjecting themselves to screening 
    and examination. The reasons according to the study are associated 
    with strong cultural and religious reasons and the non-availability 
    or at best, poor information about cervical cancer screening. Other 
    reasons include lack of political-will, funding, poor advocacy and 
    poor manpower.
A university don, Professor Isaac Adewole, recently said over 
    10,000 Nigerian women die of cervical cancer annually usually in 
    "a painful, miserable and undignified manners." The don 
    who is a consultant obstetrician and gynecologist at the College of 
    Medicine, University of Ibadan, also said the disease was the 
    second most prevalent form of cancer with about 10,000 cases every 
    year.
According to him, 80 per cent of cases in Nigeria were presently 
    in advanced stage where very little could be done. He said unless 
    the Federal Government acts fast by introducing measures for the 
    prevention, early detection and effective management of cervical 
    and breast cancer, the nation would continue to record greater 
    incidence and deaths of women in their prime from the two 
    diseases.
He said "cervical cancer fuels a cycle of poverty. Most of 
    these women are low income earners and often located far from 
    health institutions. The disease which affects the poorest and most 
    vulnerable women sends a ripple effect through families and 
    communities that rely heavily on women's role as both 
    providers and care givers.”
Taking the women on the causes of the disease, the Director of 
    Sponsorship, National Cervical Cancer Prevention Programme (NCCPP), 
    Dr. Erere Otrofanowei, reeled out statistics of the scourge 
    in Nigeria. She also revealed that available statistics indicate 
    that every 10 minutes two women die from cervical cancer worldwide, 
    while 80 per cent of cases are recorded in Africa. According to 
    her, the disease affects more of younger productive women between 
    20 years and mid 30s.
She described HPV as the most commonly transmitted virus in the 
    world affecting an aggregate of 630 million people worldwide as 
    compared to the Human Immuno-Deficiency Virus (HIV) which affects 
    38 million people worldwide. The virus, she said, is contacted in 
    two ways - through sexual intercourse and intimate skin-to-skin 
    contact and cannot be prevented with the use of condom like other 
    virus infections. She disclosed however that HPV can be treated, if 
    detected early, usually through screening, before it progresses to 
    cervical cancer.
“It is contacted through sex and intimate skin-to-skin contact. 
    One problem about the virus is that it cannot be prevented with the 
    use of condom. Once a woman is affected, it can take between five 
    and 30 years for the virus to develop into full cancer, but since 
    it has no early symptoms, the woman feels very healthy while the 
    virus continues to ravage her. By the time the symptoms begin to 
    show, the situation becomes uncontrollable. Virtually nothing can 
    be done to remedy the situation and the woman waits for death,” she 
    said.
Cervical cancer, she disclosed, has been reduced drastically in 
    the western world because the countries engaged in universal 
    screening. “The rate of the cancer in the western world was 
    formerly high as it is in Nigeria now, which is 70 per cent, but 
    because of universal screening, the rate fell by 99 per cent in 
    some places, but in Nigeria, it is rising drastically. “The 
    government of England writes letters to all those who have attained 
    a certain age to go for screening and this letter is repeated as a 
    reminder until the woman goes for it to ensure that the woman does 
    not die of that cancer. But we don’t have this here and due to 
    underdevelopment, cervical cancer is about 83 per cent high in 
    third-world countries. “If we can introduce universal screening, it 
    would reduce drastically,” she 
    told
Otrofanowei who noted that the key in drastically reducing 
    cervical and breast cancer in the country remain subjecting oneself 
    to early detection and examination, also stated that her 
    organisation has commenced awareness creation across the country 
    aimed at carrying the message to the rural areas to deepen the 
    sensitisation effort.
The Pastor-in charge of the parish, Supo Omisakin, at the 
    occasion, advised members of the church to constantly take time off 
    to attend to their health by regularly going for medical tests. He 
    said the advice and free screening exercise were in line with the 
    teaching of the General Overseer of RCCG, Pastor Enoch. A. 
    Adeboye, on healthy living. He noted that Adeboye had for sometime 
    now been emphasising medical check ups for ministers and workers of 
    the church for them as to know their health status.
Omisakin said his parish chose cervical and breast cancer 
    because the two diseases have been killing a lot of prominent women 
    out of ignorance or negligence. He added that faith in God does not 
    prevent people from subjecting themselves to check ups and 
    screening, saying that check ups and screening give knowledge. He 
    buttressed his argument with a verse in the Bible which says that 
    "...my people perish for lack of 
    knowledge," saying that faith works on knowledge.
According to Omisakin, one of the reasons why his parish was 
    embarking the exercise was because the church is designed to be a 
    solution centre both for its members and the community in which 
    they belong, adding that "we believe that God has opened our 
    eyes to the fact that we are Divine Solution Providers (DSPs) and 
    we are only working towards fulfilling that purpose."
He said other programmes to be embarked upon by the church would 
    be to develop and empower area boys in Anthony Village and its 
    environs as well as partnering with the Councillor of Anthony 
    Village to touch people's lives.
Speaking at the occasion, Mrs. Odunaiya thanked the 
    pastorate for the opportunity given to the women to know their 
    status. She told the gathering how she lost two of her close 
    friends recently to the deadly scourge. According to her, one of 
    the women was treated of fibroid at the Lagos University Teaching 
    Hospital (LUTH), and United States of America, where she had gone 
    to seek medical attention not knowing that it was cervical cancer 
    she had. By the time it was discovered it was too late and she 
    died.
Odunaiya advised the women to take advantage of the free 
    screening exercise and be in the forefront of the campaign against 
    the preventable but deadly disease. She also advised the women to 
    regularly present themselves to test and screening.
Other aspects of the programme was the free HIV, blood pressure 
    (BP) and sugar level test conducted by the Redeemed AIDS Programme 
    Action Committee (RAPAC) for both male and female members of the 
    church.
