Prostrate Problems
The prostate gland lies just below the bladder in males. It 
    surrounds the top part of the urinary passage that drains from the 
    bladder known as the urethra. The gland produces the bulk of the 
    fluid in semen (the fluid that transports and nourishes sperm).
At birth, the prostate is the size of a pea and by age 25 years, 
    reaches the size of a walnut. Another period of prostate growth 
    occurs in most men in their mid to late 40’s. This occurs when 
    cells in the middle part of the prostate which surrounds the 
    urethra begin to produce more rapidly. The reason for this is not 
    fully understood but some researchers believe it may be connected 
    to the sensitivity of the gland to the male hormone, testosterone. 
    This tissue enlargement known medically as Benign Prostatic 
    Hyperplasia (BPH) often compresses the urethra, blocking urinary 
    flow to some degree. BPH affects 50% of men in their 60’s and 90% 
    of men in their 70’s and 80’s. It is important to note that the 
    presence of BPH is not connected to developing prostate cancer.
The symptoms of prostate enlargement vary on an individual basis 
    and only about 50% of men with this problem have symptoms 
    significant enough to seek medical advice. The symptoms include 
    Urinary frequency, difficulty starting urination, weak urinary 
    stream, stopping and starting during urination, urgency (urgent 
    need to urinate), Nocturia (increased frequency at night), 
    inability to completely empty the bladder, Haematuria (blood in the 
    urine), and urinary tract infections.
The main risk factor for developing BPH is aging. Other risk 
    factors include heredity as the likelihood increases if there is a 
    family history; Marital Status as married men are more likely to 
    develop this condition than single men for unknown reasons and 
    National origin as some races have a higher incidence of BPH.
Diagnosis is based on history and physical examination. Your 
    doctor may need to perform a digital rectal exam as the prostate 
    may be felt through the rectum; a urine analysis may be performed 
    to rule out infection and a blood test to check the level of 
    Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) may be done (higher than normal 
    levels may indicate BPH, prostatitis or cancer of the prostate). 
    PSA is naturally produced by the prostate to liquefy semen and is 
    normally present in the blood stream at low levels.
If these tests indicate an enlarged prostate, your doctor may 
    decide to carry out some of the following investigations: 
    Ultrasound, cystoscopy, intravenous pyelogram (IVP), urodynamic 
    studies, urinary flow test and postvoid residual volume test.
Complications
Prostate gland enlargement poses a serious health threat when 
    the ability to empty the bladder is interfered with. A constantly 
    full bladder is very uncomfortable and there is also the risk of 
    recurrent bladder infection which may ascend to involve the 
    kidneys.
Treatment
Treatment is determined by severity of symptoms. Urinary 
    bleeding, recurrent infections and kidney damage require treatment. 
    In symptom free patients, treatment may not be necessary. Treatment 
    options include medications, non-surgical treatments and surgery. 
    Moderate cases are commonly treated with 
    Medications such as Alpha 
    blockers which relax the muscles of the bladder neck, making 
    urination easier (these include Terazosin, Doxazosin, Tamsulosin 
    and Afluzosin. Some drugs 
    act to shrink the prostate gland such as Finasteride and 
    Dutasteride. A few men that take finasteride may experience 
    impotence. Some doctors prescribe a combination of the above 
    classified drugs.
Non-surgical treatments include Heat therapy in which heat is 
    passed through the urethra to damage excess prostate tissue. Types 
    of heat therapy include Microwave therapy where computer controlled 
    microwave energy destroys the inner part of the gland; 
    Radiofrequency therapy where radio waves are sent through needles 
    inserted in the prostate gland to destroy the tissue; 
    Electrovaporization therapy where high frequency electrical current 
    is passed via the urethra to the gland that cuts and vaporizes 
    excess tissue; Laser Therapy employs the use of lasers to achieve 
    the heating results; A prostatic stent 
    made of a small metal coil may be inserted into the urethra to 
    widen it and keep it patent.
Due to the use of medications and less invasive procedures, 
    Surgical treatment is now on 
    the decline and is now reserved for severe complicated cases. 
    Surgery is however the most effective form of treatment for BPH. 
    The types of surgical approaches are Transurethral Resection of the 
    Prostate (TURP), Transurethral Incision of the Prostate (TUIP) and 
    Open Prostatectomy.
There are ways to help control the symptoms of an enlarged 
    prostate. Emptying the bladder regularly to avoid it getting full 
    will help alleviate the discomfort. Some men are better able to 
    achieve this by sitting on the toilet rather than standing. Alcohol 
    and caffeinated beverages should be avoided as they irritate the 
    bladder and increases urine production. Avoid decongestants as they 
    encourage tightening of the urethral sphincter making urination 
    more difficult. Avoid drinking water and beverages after 7pm to 
    reduce nocturia.
Complementary and Alternative Medicine
Saw palmetto has been used to treat BPH. It is extracted from 
    the berries of the saw palmetto shrub. It is thought to work in a 
    way similar to finasteride. Extensive studies have shown 
    improvement in some individuals and no symptom relief in others. A 
    major drawback of using this herb is that it suppresses the 
    baseline PSA level which is important for screening for prostate 
    cancer.
It is advisable that all men over 40 years of age have annual 
    prostate examinations.
