Gum disease may increase cancer risk
Gum disease may increase the risk of developing cancer, 
    researchers have said. Male health professionals with a history of 
    gum disease in a long-running study, have a 14 per cent higher 
    overall risk of developing cancer, they said.
"After controlling smoking and other risk factors, 
    periodontal disease was significantly associated with an increased 
    risk of lung, kidney, pancreatic and hematological (blood) 
    cancers," Dr. Dominique Michaud of Imperial 
    College, London and colleagues wrote in the journal, 
    Lancet Oncology.
This higher overall risk persisted even in people who had never 
    smoked.
Gum or periodontal disease is an infection of the tissues 
    surrounding and supporting the teeth. Prior studies have suggested 
    people with periodontal disease are more likely to develop heart 
    disease and diabetes.
Dr. Kabir Muhammad, a dental surgeon at Dans Medical 
    Centre and Dental Clinic, Ikorodu Road, Ketu, Lagos, said that gum 
    diseases could be prevented through regular tooth brushing and 
    flossing.
He said people have gum diseases because they do not apply good 
    brushing technique and they hardly floss their teeth.
His words: "Regular tooth brushing and flossing are the 
    preventive measures of oral diseases. A regular brushing and 
    flossing of teeth, will make the individual have very low oral 
    diseases.
"Regular tooth brushing means, brush your teeth twice 
    daily; preferably morning and night. It is more beneficial to brush 
    the teeth after food in the morning and make it the last thing at 
    night. We are not brushing to increase our appetite; rather 
    brushing is done to eliminate the food debris left in the mouth 
    after eating.
"So, when brushing is done after eating, it is more 
    beneficial to the mouth than before eating. Food debris hangs in 
    the mouth if brushing is done before eating. But if the brushing is 
    done after eating, all the food debris will be brushed off. This 
    will make the individual start the day without any food debris in 
    the mouth (clean and fresh)."
The surgeon continued: "Accordingly, if the individual 
    wants to sleep at night, it is preferable to brush the mouth. This 
    will make all the food debris (or particles) that have been hanging 
    between the teeth during the day, brushed off, without following 
    the person to bed. So, the person is going to sleep feeling fresh. 
    The good news about this is, there will be no food debris for 
    bacteria to work on, overnights.
"There is nothing wrong in brushing before eating in the 
    morning, like its cultural in our environment. One of those things 
    that cause early brushing is when most individuals wake up in the 
    morning, the mouth will not be fresh, and the individual may not 
    feel so good. This is as a result of the fact that the mouth has 
    not been producing saliva all night.
"Though, it is very important to brush before or after food 
    in the morning, it is more important to brush at night.
"Dental floss is like a tiny little rope that is used to 
    clean in-between the teeth. It cleans where brushes cannot easily 
    get to.
"Instead of using tooth pick, it is advisable to use dental 
    floss. Dental floss is what is professionally recognised and 
    recommended. Tooth pick affects both the gum and teeth. It causes 
    damage to the gum and holes in the teeth, giving room for more 
    particles to stick in, thereby leading to a periodontal 
    disease."
The implication of this is that, the more you use toothpick, the 
    more there are holes in your teeth, and this gives room for food 
    debris to comfortably reside in your teeth. With time, you will 
    start having problems with your teeth, gum, or even breadth.
"Regular tooth flossing will help a lot. To floss, the 
    edges of the tiny rope will be with both hands, and used between 
    each tooth. There are different sizes and shapes. Flossing is more 
    effective than toothpick. It’s friendlier to the gum, and more 
    effective for the teeth. All the places that the brush can not get 
    to, flossing can take care of it.
"Dental floss cannot be easily gotten because Nigerians do 
    not really buy it. So, it is only sold in the major supermarkets 
    and hospital pharmacies. The fact that tooth pick is cheap, makes 
    people buy and use it more than the floss, unknown to them, they 
    are destroying their teeth.
"It is important for individuals to know the technique of 
    brushing. The type of brush you use matters a lot. Some people use 
    very hard toothbrush, thinking that the harder the toothbrush the 
    cleaner the teeth will be. Not knowing that the hard tooth brush 
    causes problem for their teeth, because it will wear away the 
    surface of their teeth, the hard surface, and the enamel. The teeth 
    under the enamel will be exposed, so when anything touches the 
    teeth, it will shock them. Hard tooth brush also destroys the gum, 
    causing gingival recession.
"While brushing, you are not supposed to use force; rather, 
    you are supposed to use technique. You are supposed to brush from 
    your gum, down, if you are brushing the upper teeth, and from your 
    gum up, if you are brushing the lower teeth. That way, you will not 
    destroy your gum," Muhammad said.
The medical expert’s advice for Nigerians: "Go for dental 
    check-up every six months, whether you have pain or not. If that is 
    done on a regular basis, you would not have a gum disease and your 
    mouth will be free from a lot of problems."
But a lot of Nigerians don’t have that attitude. "A typical 
    Nigerian doesn’t like to visit a dentist, even when he or she has 
    pain, he or she will still be managing the pain, until he or she 
    can’t sleep, that is when he or she will go to a dental clinic with 
    series of complaints.
"Ninety-five per cent of the cases we see are people coming 
    late. They wouldn’t come when the problem is mild. On enquiry about 
    when it started, they will say, ‘it’s been long o!. It’s been up to 
    two or three years’. They’ve been managing it by going to chemist 
    shops using different kinds of drugs, visiting herbal shops to get 
    all sorts of drug in order to treat the problem which could have 
    been avoided."
"They would have tried all possible methods at home, 
    petrol, battery water, touch-and-go, grounded ‘Alabukun’, chewing 
    stick (pako ayan), it is when everything has 
    failed, that they will now show up at the clinic. By this time, 
    they would have inflicted all sorts of chemical burns," he 
    further said.
Really, to prevent gum diseases, ensure your mouth is brushed in 
    the right way, twice daily, using toothpaste with fluoride.
How the study was done
People with gum diseases have inflammation in their blood and 
    inflammation also has been linked with cancer. But this could 
    simply mean that whatever causes the inflammation may also cause 
    gum disease and cancer. Michaud and colleagues wanted to see if gum 
    disease increases the risk of cancer.
They used data from a large study of male doctors and other 
    health professionals aged 40 to 75. The study was started in 1986 
    at Havard University, U.S.
Nearly 50,000 men filled out health surveys and were followed 
    for more than 17 years. The survey included information on gum 
    disease and bone loss, as well as number of teeth and tooth 
    loss.
More than 5,700 of the men developed cancer, excluding cases of 
    non-melanoma skin cancers and non-aggressive prostate cancer. The 
    researchers found that men who had gum disease had 14 percent 
    higher cancer risk compared to those who did not.
The risks were higher depending on the type of cancer.
Periodontal diseases must be treated
Those with history of gum disease had a 36 per cent higher risk 
    of lung cancer, 49 per cent higher risk of kidney cancer, 54 per 
    cent highr risk of pancreatic 
    cancer and 30 per cent higher risk of having a blood cancer (such 
    as non-hodgkin lymphoma, leukaemia or multiple myeloma) compared to 
    men who did not have a history of gum disease.
In those who never smoked, gum disease was linked with a 21 per 
    cent increase in overall cancer risk and a 35 per cent higher risk 
    of blood cancers. They found no association for lung cancer in this 
    group.
Men who had fewer teeth (0 to 16) at the start of the study had 
    a 70 per cent higher risk of lung cancer compared with individuals 
    with more teeth (25 to 32) at the start of the study but this may 
    be linked with smoking.
"The increased risks noted for haematological, 
    kidney, and pancreatic cancers need confirmation but suggest that 
    gum disease might be a marker of a susceptible immune system or 
    might directly affect cancer risk," Michaud said in a 
    statement.
It is worth noting that, it is not only the men that are prone 
    to the condition, women too are.
The researchers say it is premature to suggest that good oral 
    hygiene can prevent cancer but said periodontal disease should 
    nevertheless be treated.
