Post-Partum Hemorrhage (PPH)
A joke Bello, 32, gave birth to the first set of sextuplets in 
    Nigeria in February this year. The woman was delivered of the 
    babies by Caesarean Section (C.S). But she developed 
    complications from excessive bleeding at the Olabisi Onabanjo 
    University Teaching Hospital in Sagamu, Ogun State where she gave 
    birth to the babies. She gave birth on Thursday and died on 
    Sunday.
According to figures from the World Health Organization (WHO), 
    published in 2007, Nigeria’s maternal mortality rate is the second 
    highest in the world, after India.
Over half a million women die during childbirth annually around 
    the world, according to the WHO, and Nigeria alone accounts for 10 
    per cent of these deaths.
The rate at which Nigerian women die after giving birth is 
    alarmingly on the increase. The most common cause of maternal 
    mortality in Nigeria today is excessive bleeding after birth which 
    is also known as Post Partum Hemorrhage (PPH).
Dr Abdul Lateef A. Imran of Beachland Specialist 
    Hospital, Arepo, Ibafo, Ogun State, speaking to The 
    Nation, said: "On a yearly basis, there is more than 
    half a million women who die of PPH. About 80 per cent of the 
    deaths happen in the developing countries, one of which is 
    Nigeria."
He described PPH as bleeding that is 500mls or more after a 
    woman has been delivered of a baby.
In an extract from Derek LLeweyn Jones’ 
    Everywoman, it is stated that, "Most 
    women lose between 300 and 800ml of blood after their baby is born. 
    This is of little consequence, as during pregnancy, the woman’s 
    blood volume increases by at least one liter.
"However, if the woman is anaemic, has a forceps 
    delivery, or a caesarian section or has a multiple pregnancy, the 
    blood loss may be serious."
David Werner, author of Where There is No 
    Doctor, stated that, "When the placenta comes 
    out, there is always a brief flow of blood. It normally lasts only 
    a few minutes and not more than a quarter of a liter (one cup) of 
    blood is lost. A little bleeding may continue for several days and 
    is usually not serious. Bleeding can often be slowed down by 
    putting the baby to the breast.
"Sometimes, a woman may be bleeding severely inside 
    without much blood coming out. If it seems her stomach is getting 
    bigger, it may be filling with blood."
Dr Imran identified what usually lead to PPH in the tropics as 
    anaemia. "Women in the tropics are prone to PPH because most 
    of them are anaemic, even before pregnancy. Most of them have been 
    having below PCV of 30 per cent because of poor nutrition, frequent 
    pregnancy and delivery. Most of them do not wait to recover from 
    previous birth before conceiving again. They do not give adequate 
    spacing. Within a year, they have taken in again, the iron 
    deficiency they suffer from in the last pregnancy, they have not 
    even recovered before going into another pregnancy."
He further said that, "In Nigeria, most of the citizens 
    live in the rural areas where they do not have access to 
    qualitative healthcare and skilled personnel. Most of the women 
    would have lost a lot of blood before getting to the right place 
    where they can be attended to. While getting to that place, the 
    frustration of the health system itself and the bureaucracy of the 
    hospital (register, pay, wait for doctor etc.) can frustrate 
    the patient. This is coupled with the fact that the financial power 
    of women is so low. Most women have to wait for their husbands to 
    come before taking a financial decision or get support, even to be 
    able to get a good hospital."
The Ibafo-based gynecologist said that there are many things 
    that can cause PPH, but atony is the commonest. Atony is a 
    situation where the uterus fails to contract after birth. He said, 
    "The mechanism that makes bleeding stops is contraction of the 
    uterus, which narrows the vessel at the placenta where the bleeding 
    is coming from and form a clot, Once 
    that is in place, there would not be abnormal bleeding."
He said further, "The women who are at a risk of atony are 
    women who have fibroid. It dispenses the uterus and make it 
    difficult for it to contract very well. Also, any condition that 
    leads to enlargement of the womb in the uterus, beyond necessary, 
    like when you have multiple gestation, (twins, triplet, sextuplet, 
    octuplet) the uterus over extended and this does not make the 
    uterus to contract very well, thereby causing bleeding."
Imran continued by saying that Infection can also cause PPH. 
    Infection occurs when there is product of conception left in the 
    womb, no matter how little. According to him, 
    It will not allow the uterus to contract very well, at the 
    same time, causing a lot of bleeding.
He also said, women who have had multiple scars; either from 
    previous termination of pregnancy or other surgical procedure such 
    as fibroid or caesarian. All 
    these leave scars in the womb. When a placenta is near the scar, it 
    does not shed out easily.
He related the death of women who die from childbirth bleeding 
    with the incompetent hands they often go to for delivery. "For 
    medical personnel who do not know how to manage this, they will 
    just pull out the placenta and the thing will come out in pieces. 
    All those ones that are left behind will continue to bleed", 
    he said.
Most of the time, he said further, it happens in the maternity 
    home, traditional birth attendance (TBA) home and they would not 
    know what to do. To make matters worse, the patient would not be 
    referred on time, until it is too late, and the patient will just 
    die like that."
In continuation, he said that, for a woman to survive it, she 
    has to get to the right place at the right time. If the doctor and 
    midwives can not detect it on time, he said, they will not know 
    what to do. He observed that, those who die as a result of PPH do 
    so because they die in an unskilled hand, either in a church, 
    clinics, herbal home or even with midwives and nurses who have 
    centers all over the place. That is why it is a problem in the 
    developing nation.
In continuation of what cause PPH, Imran said, "Ruptured 
    uterus, this occurs in women who have 
    ceasarian Section before, but who want to deliver normally 
    at the next opportunity. At times, the uterus can rupture, and if 
    it is not noticed, the woman will just be bleeding continuously. 
    For instance, women who have had two or three deliveries, go to TBA 
    home, and the midwives there apply pressure by climbing on the 
    woman and pressing her stomach from above, so that the baby can 
    come out. In the process, they sometimes rupture the uterus. After 
    the baby is out, the woman will just continue to bleed. If the 
    woman is not taken to the right place, at the right time, she could 
    bleed to death."
He said that, there is primary and secondary PPH. It happens 
    within 24 hours of delivery, especially from infection. The person 
    does not start bleeding immediately. Secondary PPH is an infection 
    from the retained products. It is not immediate. In this case, the 
    woman would have delivered, she might have even gotten home, and on 
    the third day, she will just discover that she has started bleeding 
    seriously. If there is any product left, bacteria will act on it, 
    then she will start bleeding.
To combat PPH, Jones, the author of 
    Everywoman said, "In most hospitals, 
    an injection of a drug which makes the uterus contract is given as 
    the baby is born. This method has reduced the risk of PPH 
    considerably. If bleeding continues, there are now new drugs to 
    combat it, and the doctor may put a hand inside the uterus to make 
    sure that no pieces of placenta remain, as these could be causing 
    the bleeding."
Werner of Where there is no doctor also added 
    that, "To help prevent or control heavy bleeding, let 
    the baby suck the mother’s breast. This will cause her to produce a 
    hormone (pituitrin) that helps control bleeding."
Imran contributed by saying, "The doctor has to be ready 
    for that by doing all sorts of things to ensure the contraction of 
    the uterus, otherwise, the woman will continue to bleed."
Imran said that PPH can be managed if the person in charge is 
    able to recognise the situation at hand. "Management starts 
    from anticipation. So, when you see somebody, who is probably in 
    her 40s with five or seven deliveries, the physician would have 
    anticipated that, when she delivers, there might be bleeding, so 
    plans must be ready to tackle it if it occurs," he said.
He explained, "If you do not anticipate a problem, you will 
    not quickly find a solution during emergency. It will happen before 
    you know it. But, when you anticipate problems, by knowing the 
    women at risk; fibroid, multiple pregnancy, multiparity, 
    over-enlarged uterus, then, the health expert will watch out for 
    it."
In order to decrease the number of women affected by PPH, Imran 
    mentioned some signs that will be noticed so that the woman can get 
    help and survive, if possible. "When you lose blood, the body 
    wants to compensate for it, and one of the compensation mechanisms 
    is that, the pulse rate will increase, and that means, the heart 
    rate will increase too, and with time, the woman starts flaring the 
    womb, becomes weak (no stamina to do anything), develops features 
    of heart failure, legs will be swollen, congesting accumulation of 
    veins in the lungs, person would not be able to lie down flat, and 
    so on."
Imran noted that "PPH is preventable if the woman register 
    in a good health service place and deliver in a skilled hand.
"One of the problems doctors face with pregnancy is that a 
    woman might be registered in a place, but due to labour pains and 
    unavailability of a transportation at the oddest hour, she will be 
    taken to the next available hospital/clinic around. Even in some 
    situations, she delivers at home or inside the vehicle taking her 
    to the hospital.
"Doctors do not like to operate on a woman, and she starts 
    bleeding, he will be faced with the dilemma of either to remove the 
    uterus to save her life (knowing fully well that she will not 
    conceive again). If there is delay, she will continue to be weak 
    and by the time the doctor finalises the decision on removing the 
    uterus, it is already late. So, these are the dilemmas we face as 
    surgeons. For instance, somebody who is just delivering for the 
    first time, and you are removing the uterus, or worse still, the 
    baby is not alive, the doctor will definitely be reluctant to 
    remove the uterus to stop the 
    bleeding.
PPH will lead to death if it is poorly managed.
Dr Imran concluded by saying, "We need blood to survive or 
    live if a woman is bleeding continuously, the total blood volume in 
    the body is 3.5 litres. So if a woman releases 500ml per 
    minute then, there will be need for an urgent attention."
