Group canvases behaviour change at the grassroots
Youths at every point in time should be exposed to development 
    programmes which will prepare them to meet the challenges of 
    adolescence and adulthood through a structured, progressive series 
    of activities and experience which help them obtain social, 
    emotional, ethical, physical and cognitive competencies. Such 
    programmes are also knowledge centred as it builds a range of life 
    skills, activities to show that youth learning is a reason to be 
    involved, whether in sports, clubs, community service and provide 
    opportunities to connect them to a wide array of adult and peer 
    mentors.
The people of Isele Community, Ikorodu, in Lagos State, young 
    and old were opportuned to be empowered with such developmental 
    programmes for one year. At the end, a final Open Community Meeting 
    was held recently at the community.
The programme was titled ‘Final Open 
    Community’ meeting in Isele Community 
    ," otherwise known as CHIPAC 
    project.
Speaking about the highlights of the one year project, the 
    Executive Director Project, HFPD, Mr Henry Adenigba said the 
    training was tagged Peer Education Plus Project for five target 
    groups namely. Male Out of School Youth (MOSY), Female Out of 
    School Youth (FOSY); Transport Workers (TW’s), Female Sex Workers 
    (FSW) and Uniformed Service Men (USM).
The project according to him centred on behavioural change on 
    health issues, vocational skills, youth development project, 
    capacity building project, among others. The programme took off in 
    the Community after having got approval from the Community 
    Development Associations CDAs.
The experience sharing session by each target groups afforded 
    participants opportunity to explain what they’ve learnt in last one 
    year.
"There are some information which I now know about HIV and 
    AIDS, I’m now better informed," said a member of MOSY 
    group.
"I now know the effects of drug /alcohol abuse and how one 
    can live positively if a person is positive," said a member of 
    FOSY group. "As youth, abstinence is the 
    key" he said.
A Transport Worker in his own contribution enjoined his fellow 
    participants to remain faithful to their partner. "If you 
    can’t, please use condom," he warned. For another participant, 
    the programme is an eye opener "because I now know how best to 
    manage my money," said Ms Precious Ifeoma.
Although the programme according to the Executive Director 
    Admin/Finance, Mrs Adeyeye, is a final open Community meeting but 
    it does not end there.
"After we leave, they (community) will continue with the 
    programme, we’ll only come to mentor them and follow them up. 
    "It is a behavioural change Community project," said 
    Adeyeye.
To ensure community of the project, a Community Based 
    Organisation comprising all the target groups was inaugurated at 
    the event. "Any activity they carry out, they’ll inform us and 
    our sponsor will get to know about it," she said.
Other highlights of the event was drama presentations on HIV and 
    AIDs as well as presentation of 
    award to notable leaders in the community who have contributed to 
    the success of the project. The project was sponsored by USAID, 
    anchored by Society for Family Health (SFH) in Lagos State and 
    implemented by Humanity Foundation for Peace and Development.
