Whatever Happened to Traditional Family 
    Structure!
The need to restore the African traditional family 
    structure to allow it regain its traditional status and power of 
    effecting positive change in the society was part of discussion at 
    a recent family congress held in Abuja, writes 
    Mary 
    Ekah
“The task of raising a child properly was a sacred one because 
    of its far reaching consequences for the security and survival of 
    the soul of the community. Fathers, mothers, grandparents, older 
    siblings, in-laws and relatives had a collective responsibility to 
    raise the young and each saw this as an obligation to the family 
    and the larger community. To fail to raise a morally responsible 
    person was to have failed the community and brought disgrace on 
    one’s family and kindred …”
This was the submission of the National Co-coordinator, Marriage 
    and Family Life Committee of the Catholic Bishops Conference and 
    Director of the Lagos Resource Centre, Mrs. Bridget Itsueli 
    at the World Congress Families held in Abuja recently. This was 
    said in recognition of the contribution of the African traditional 
    family to the development of good citizens and establishment of the 
    community’s identity, its outlook, values and goals.
The traditional societies, Itsueli said, recognises the 
    political and social significance of the family, noting however 
    that the modern Nigeria society seems quite ignorant of this truth. 
    “It is truth that the larger community is always a sum total and a 
    reflection of its individual families. We cannot continue to ignore 
    the current lack of the moral values which is glaringly evident in 
    our leadership at all levels of the Nigerian society,” she said.
She noted that this was a reflection of what is pervasive at the 
    family level were there is serious moral disintegration, which need 
    to be addressed on a national agenda. “In a nation where the 
    majority of its families live in abject poverty and deprivation of 
    all sorts, where basic amenities like education and health are 
    handled with non-chalance 
    and a gross lack of probity, parents and families in such a nation 
    cannot but be demoralised, incapacitated and weak,” Itsueli 
    said.
She stressed that any society whose families are so weak can 
    have no solid identity, no impressive institutions and no core 
    values. She therefore enjoined that it was time we recognised at 
    all levels the importance of revamping the family structure to 
    allow the family regain its traditional status and its power to 
    effect positive change in the society.
The congress in Abuja organised by a coalition of 
    non-governmental organisations, Foundation for African Cultural 
    Heritage (FACH), which interest is in the promotion of good family 
    values, had various speakers who spoke basically on the need to 
    promote good family values. The congress was a pre-congress for the 
    World Congress of Families billed for early August in 
    Netherlands.
It was to encourage all stakeholders to take interest in the 
    traditional family formation – being the man, the woman and the 
    children- and do all it 
    entails to ensure that the traditional family is structured to 
    bring up good children who would be stable and responsible citizens 
    that would turn out to be the leaders of tomorrow.
It was on this note that the Executive Secretary, Institute for 
    Work and Family Integration, Mrs. Regina Bazuaye said that 
    all the problems in the society today emanate from having people 
    who were not well formed as children and when they grew up to 
    become adults, they could not make good citizens. “If children were 
    well brought up, giving the proper foundation by the parents, they 
    would grow up to be responsible citizens, adults and parents who 
    would also want to bring up children who are equally well brought 
    up,” she added.
Bazuaye, who said FACH is trying to make every one awaken to the 
    responsibility of engendering good family values, noted that the 
    impressive turn out and interactive section at the Abuja congress 
    went a long way to show that people are really keen on promoting 
    good family values. “What we have decided to do, either through 
    individual NGO levels or under FACH, is to keep on carrying out 
    various activities that would help in promoting laws that would 
    also help to keep the family firmly rooted as it fights against 
    things that are anti-family,” she added.
FACH, Bazuaye said is also concerned about how the Nigerian came 
    about children that are drug addicts and streets kids. This, she 
    noted was because the parents have fallen short of their 
    responsibilities in the pursuit for wealth. “We want people to know 
    that you have to work to earn a living but you don’t have to spend 
    all your time working, you have to also have time for your family 
    and also be in a position to play your primary role because you 
    cannot assign your God-given task to someone who has no interest 
    whether your child turns out right or wrong.
For example, if you work 18 ours of the day, which means you 
    left home while your children were sleeping and then come back when 
    they are in bed, you would make all the money, fly them all over 
    the world and do whatever they desire, “but then you would not even 
    know your children because you do not have time to interact with 
    them, know them and form them. You only leave them at the mercies 
    of drivers, house helps and cooks. You have to be there for your 
    children right from day one and try to make friends with them”.
She said therefore that the coalition of NGOs was out to promote 
    work and family balance and family enrichment - what you need to 
    know and what you must do to bring proper upbringing to your 
    children so that they would come out right.
“If you do a check, most of the children who are drug addicts 
    come from wealthy and middle class family. They would not know 
    about drugs if they did not have the money to purchase it, but the 
    truth is that the parents have lost out on what it really means to 
    be a parent. They are not there to play the role which God has 
    given to them.
“So if you want to have your children turn out right, you have 
    to invest in it by creating the time for them and make your 
    children know what to do, when to do it and how to do it. You must 
    also teach your children how to go through life with the right 
    inculcation of the virtues, which is what would make them turn out 
    to be good children and good adults and in the long run, good 
    citizens”, has noted.
Every discussant at the Abuja pre-World Families Congress held 
    at the Shehu Musa Yar’Adua Centre with the theme, “Plan of Action 
    on the Family in Africa – Update,” centred on how to get families 
    right. It was obvious that everybody at the congress 
    recongnised the fact that the 
    problem in the world today is that parents have stopped 
    parenting.
Speaking further, Bazuaye said, “These days we are talking about 
    re-branding Nigeria, the focus should be on the children and 
    particularly the parents, getting them to know the importance of 
    their God-given role as parents. Being parents is not just bearing 
    a child; you have to give that child a good background so that the 
    child would turn out right and make you proud”.
She said FACH was also encouraging government to recognise this 
    fact that good parenting was a panacea to the development of the 
    society. The foundation, she said is also out to encourage 
    government to also introduce laws that cut across various sectors 
    to make it possible for people to know that whatever work they are 
    doing, they have to create time for their families, particularly 
    the upbringing of the children by spending quality time with the 
    children.
The negligence of the grooming children in right way, Bazuaye 
    stressed further, has so much negative effect on the national 
    economy. She was of the view that if the society has good citizens, 
    bribery and corruption would not be, noting, “If a child is brought 
    up to know what is right from what is wrong, he would not go wrong. 
    When you buy exams question for your children, you are more or less 
    encouraging corruption in the system. So everything stems from the 
    parents because if the parents show good examples to the children 
    by the way they conduct themselves, the children would turn out to 
    be like their parents whom they have seen living in particular 
    ways.”
Bazuaye, a social scientist by training, read industrial 
    administration at the University of Sawford, UK and also has post 
    graduate diploma in business administration from Sheffield 
    University, UK and has had various working experiences all around 
    Nigeria in the ministry, media and non-governmental organisation is 
    so particular about mothers playing their parental roles more than 
    any other person.
She stressed that though a woman needs to work to support the 
    income of the husband especially at this period, but in all of 
    that, she must not lose focus of her primary assignment as a 
    parent. “For me I believe that the upbringing of my children is my 
    sole responsibility and not somebody else’s. So no matter what I 
    do, I try to make sure that I do my bit and I think every mother 
    has to live up to that responsibility, no matter what work you are 
    doing.
“If you find yourself in a job that does not allow you time for 
    your family, I think you should re-examine yourself and know what 
    exactly you really want in life. Do you want the goodness of your 
    children, or is it your status or whatever you are seeking? 
    Sometimes you feel you are doing it for the children because you 
    want to give them the best, but if you truly examine yourself, 
    you’ll find out that you are doing certain things because you want 
    to belong to certain class.
“We have to have our focus right, we need to know what is really 
    best for our children at some point in time. So sometime you need 
    to re-address your career situation and see what you need to do to 
    adjust. It is important to have a career because it would empower 
    you economically and give you self-independence, but you also have 
    to have a balance. Employers also have to recognise that an 
    employee who is happy and has a happy home would give better 
    performance on the job,” she said.
Bazuaye therefore advised strongly that women must not lose 
    focus as regard their parental responsibilities. “Parenting is not 
    something you can outsource, it is something you have got to do 
    yourself and if you don’t do it right, you would end up with 
    children who would turn out to be 
    deliquence or bad adults. So you have to inculcate the 
    right virtues in them so they would grow up with these things being 
    part of them. And living the example of what you tell your children 
    to do is the best way to bring up your children because they would 
    live it better when they see the examples in you,” she 
    emphasised.
