Caring for Autism Children
Majority of children with behavioural, attention, 
    language, communication and learning disabilities such as autism 
    are not being identified early enough. But an organisation has 
    decided to see how it could put smiles on the faces of parents in 
    the care of such children, writes Funmi 
    
    Ogundare
Master Chidiebere Nwankwo, (not real name) the second in a 
    family of five, was born like any normal child, but at a stage when 
    he was supposed to be doing things just like his peers, he started 
    exhibiting strange behaviour such as having difficulty with 
    sleeping, eating and toileting, not responding to his name when 
    called, showing an unusual reaction to pain or pleasure, deaf to 
    loud sounds but affected by quiet noises, among others.
With these numerous challenges, his parents got very worried and 
    had to take him to a pediatrician for medical checkup. They were 
    advised to take him to a neuro-surgeon who diagnosed him as 
    autistic.
According to researchers, the disorder is related to over 
    excitability at nerve endings and mostly affects more males than 
    females. To this end, the Zammarr Institute, a non-governmental 
    organisation that supports children with developmental and learning 
    disabilities recently organised a one-day training workshop on 
    ‘Understanding Children on the Autistic Spectrum 
    Disorders: Implication for Families and Teachers.’ 
    The parley was for parents, teachers and social workers.
Founder of the institute, Mrs. Ronke Katagum said more 
    awareness is now being created so that people could be informed 
    about the disorder. She added that it was fast growing and there is 
    no known cure for it. She said, with behavioural intervention and 
    bio-medicals, it would go a long way in ameliorating the problems 
    associated with the disorder.
Asked what spurred her into working with autistic children, she 
    said, “It has been a long standing dream to work with the mentally 
    challenged children. People do associate them with distress and 
    their needs are not being met. I started 1997 by taking courses in 
    area of autism and today I am better for it.”
Katagum called on stakeholders to pay attention to autism, 
    saying, “it does not have a face and a child with autism may look 
    like you and I in most cases. He may be the next president as long 
    as he has the opportunity of getting early intervention which is 
    the key.”
The disorder according to International Development Director, 
    Autism Speaks United Kingdom, Mrs. Eileen Hopkins, is a 
    spectrum of developmental disorders involving impairment in 
    language, social behaviour and certain physical behaviors - with 
    symptoms that range widely in number and severity. She said it had 
    been attributed to biomedical factors such as allergies; vaccines, 
    genetic factors and neuro-developmental factors among others.
She added that parents of children with the disorder may have 
    worries about their child’s development, but should ‘come to terms’ with it, as soon as he or she is 
    diagnosed. Hopkins said people with an Autistic Spectrum Disorder 
    (ASD) usually have difficulties in three areas which included 
    social communication, interaction and imagination. With social 
    communication, she said the child might have difficulty in 
    understanding the social meaning of language and processing words, 
    be very anxious and would be unable to work out what one says or 
    means, not be able to make sense of jokes or sarcasm, misinterpret 
    body language, among others.
On the social imagination, she said the child usually have a 
    poor theory of mind, not understanding the consequence of his 
    actions and not having the flexibility of thought.
In the area of communication, Hopkins said the differences 
    include having less understanding of how to react and behave with 
    other people, and knowing how to use the signs, words and gestures, 
    as well as non-verbal method of communication.
She said teachers should be informed of his or her condition in 
    terms of social interaction and communication, adding, “a 
    child may have difficulties with reading, writing, number work or 
    understanding information, expressing themselves or understanding 
    what others are saying. There should be an Individual Education 
    Plan (IEP) to support them. Some children will benefit from extra 
    support from a Learning Support Assistant (LSA), which can help in 
    lessons and at break/lunchtimes.”
Hopkins noted that the teacher could also take reasonable steps 
    to ensure that the child is not put at a substantial disadvantage 
    and treated less favourably for a reason related to his or her 
    disability.
In helping children with the disorder, Hopkins, emphasised need 
    to increase the efficacy and range of treatment options available, 
    focus on biomedical and technological methods of treatments and 
    interventions.
A parent, Mrs. Aishatu Tukur said maintaining a child 
    with such problems could be very expensive, which requires one to 
    keep on re-assessing them by talking to the doctor, doing more 
    research that would guide them into taking good care of such 
    children. She said if one has to mainstream the autistic children 
    into the regular school, there is a need for parents to inform the 
    school of their situation, adding that it would do no good if they 
    are kept at home.
Another parent who does not want his name in print said it has 
    been very challenging taking care of his second son who was born 
    with the disorder. He said so far, he has been paying a special 
    teacher to cater for him at home. The workshop, he admitted is an 
    eye opener as it would give him more knowledge on steps to better 
    take care for his son. He emphasised the need for parents to give 
    them special attention rather than leaving them on their own.
