Is Kampala endangered?
Few years ago, the cost of Kampala was 
    affordable. Today, this is becoming unaffordable for many 
    Ni-gerians, especially the party-buffs who spend lots of 
    money weekly to get a good designer Kampala 
    dress. Fashion enthusiasts have said that unless the economy 
    improves, the costs of fabrics may continue to increase. Fabric 
    dealers, on their part, are 
    skeptical that if things do not get better it might affect 
    sales as well as the cost of material. Dealers in 
    Kampalaare among those affected by the financial 
    crisis. They have also raised fears over the stability of the 
    market and the future of the business.
Over the years, Adire fabrics (Tie and Dye), 
    also known as Kampala, has received high 
    patronage and are also used as party-uniforms for most social 
    gatherings across the country. The trend, which began in the 
    South-west of Nigeria, is now being practiced across the country. 
    In recent times, Akerele Street in Surulere, Lagos State, has 
    become synonymous with the growth of the fabric on the local and 
    international fashion scene. Scattered across the street, in front 
    of what used to be residential buildings only, are displays of a 
    variety of Kampala in different shades and 
    colours. The place is known as Akerele Adire Market.
When The Nation visited the market, the 
    method of displays seemed to classify the dealers into different 
    groups. There are those who are the producers: this group also have 
    artist-designers who specialise in making patterns on print, and 
    fashion designers who 
    specailise in creating new fashion styles with the raw 
    material. There are also the retailers who either sell the raw 
    materials or finished fashion designs. These are the varying groups 
    with business on the street. Interestingly, their places of 
    business also vary. Some business-owners use shops in front of the 
    houses, others use the open space in front of the building to 
    showcase their wares. Some house-owners also run the 
    Kampala business by converting part of their 
    houses to business points. But no matter the nature of business, 
    most of the operators lamented the low turn of business activities 
    in the area.
Before the downturn, vehicular traffic on the street was usually 
    tight and the place usually very 
    busyowing to business activities in the area; but today, 
    all that has changed. Nowadays, one could count the number of 
    customers coming to shop on the street and most people have closed 
    shop. "The situation of things in the country is affecting 
    everybody. I used to buy materials in bulk, but today I just come 
    here to count very few because people are no longer buying as they 
    used to," explained Mrs. Dupe Adeyemi, a regular face 
    at the market.
According to Adeyemi, depending on the quality and design, five 
    yards of plain Kampala material was sold between 
    N900 and N1500 last year, now it goes for between N2500 and 
    N5000.
Catherine Irabor is a society lady who loves to party and she 
    also patronises Akerele Street. Although, buying 
    Kampala as Aso-Ebi from 
    friends and loved ones who are celebrating has helped her wardrobe 
    a lot, the current situation of things in the country, she said, 
    made her to have a rethink over the last few months on what had 
    become a regular habit. She said: "I really love patronising 
    people if they have Aso-Ebi to sell because they 
    do the same for me. Before, I come here regularly to buy 
    Kampala, but I have stopped because as you know 
    things are not like it used to be. I don’t think if things continue 
    like this I would be able to keep up with the trend of even buying 
    Aso-Ebi from friends whether it is 
    Kampala, lace or Ankara. I only hope things 
    change."
Fashion designers are also not spared, as the high cost of 
    material has affected the quality of materials and production. On 
    the downturn in business, Mr. Tunji Adedayo, a specialist in 
    Kampala designs and Director of Febat 
    Enterprises, noted: "Ten years back the 
    Kampala business was booming. Then we had lots 
    of designs and new innovations. The graph began to drop in 2003 and 
    by last year, the situation became very worse. People are now 
    citing the financial meltdown as reason for the decline in 
    patronage."
Stating that financial crisis is not the only reason for the 
    decline, Adedayo said, the fallen standard of the material is 
    another reason. "The polarisation of the business and those 
    making it are now doing it without considering quality, but money; 
    this has also affected the business. That makes people to now go 
    for cheap ones and most fashion designers here prefer the quality. 
    If we don’t see, we don’t sew."
Mrs. Grace Olowu of Damseg Men and Women Wears has a 
    slightly different opinion from Adedayo’s. For her, the low turnout 
    of customers on the street increased after her shop was destroyed. 
    Pointing to her wears displayed in the open, she said, they are 
    standing where a container that used to be her boutique stood. 
    "Although things really changed last year, it became worse 
    when the clean up in Lagos hit us. As you can see, I have to make 
    do with the open ground. I and my children must eat."
However, the downturn in business has not effected the reduction 
    of prices. Olowu noted: "You would think that the situation of 
    things would reduce prices, but materials are going up everyday. A 
    Kampala gown without embroidery that was sold 
    for N1200 early last year is now sold between N1800 and N2500; 
    while a pair of men’s wear without embroidery sold for N1800 is now 
    sold for between N2000 and N3500 depending on the quality."
She hinted that as long as the producers continue to increase 
    the prices of plain Kampala, the prices will 
    continue to rise. "It is not in our hand to control the 
    prices; it is in the hand of the producers. But I doubt if they can 
    do anything because it is a general problem."
According to her, low patronage by customers has also affected 
    other businesses on the street as some have closed up as a result. 
    She named Madam Grace Stephen-Imala as one person who could speak 
    on matters relating to the rise in the cost of 
    Kampala, saying she is the first Nigerian to go 
    into the business on Akerele Street.
When The Nation met Madam Grace 
    Stephen-Imala, her tale was not different from that of the others. 
    As a producer, she explained she is not finding it easy getting her 
    materials. Hinting that the prices of the raw materials had 
    increased, she said, these have affected her prices. "The 
    materials are now very expensive. I used to buy a drum of Sulphate 
    for N9000, now it is N18000; last year soda was sold for N2400, 
    today it is between N6000 and N7000. It is the same with the 
    Brocade we use. Quality dye and brocade are very hard to come by, 
    so to get it, one has to spend a lot," she said.
Alhaja Muibat Owonikoko is another woman who has spent decades 
    in the trade. She added voice to Stephen-Imala, saying that if 
    things continue like this more people will abandon the business. 
    She said: "to make Kampala is not an easy 
    task. First, one would use candle wax to make the design on the 
    textile, before it is dyed in the first colour and spread to dry. 
    The material is then redesigned and dyed in the second colour in 
    the wax using hot water, before it is finally spread out to dry. 
    People are already leaving the business and more people may leave, 
    if things continue like this."
She called on the government to come to their aid, saying, the 
    industry holds a lot of opportunity for tourism and commerce. 
    "Without the government, one cannot go very far. We need the 
    government to meet up with international markets demands. They can 
    also help the young ones develop and expand their business into 
    international standard."
