New Kia Cerato: Innovation beyond change
With its generous wheelbase equates to a spacious 
    interior, the flat floor design at the rear that aids passengers 
    seating at the centre feel comfortable; well-designed and equipped 
    interior to its aesthetically-beautiful exterior, everything; every 
    part of the new Kia Cerato talks about a vehicle designed for, with 
    and around the driver. Writes TAJUDEEN ADEBANJO 
    
For some time now, it has been evident to the observant person 
    who regularly navigates the ever-busy streets of Lagos that Kia 
    motors has indeed become a factor in the Nigerian and at large West 
    African automobile circle. And with its newest incarnation 
    ; the new-improved Cerato, it has 
    raised the bar several notches higher.
This car, marketed with a campaign tagged ‘Unbeatable value for money’; and that is no idle 
    comment. From its spacious cabin, well-sorted looks, well-designed 
    and equipped interior to its aesthetically-beautiful exterior, 
    everything; every part of the car talks about a vehicle designed 
    for, with and around the driver.
Obviously the new car is nothing short of a complete 
    rejuvenation in terms of design. For example, it is interesting to 
    see how the front and rear headlamps are detailed yet still a 
    coherent part of the whole design, or how the shoulders are now 
    more pronounced without being too heavy.
First of all, the new Cerato is a 4-door sedan, available in 
    1.6 litre engine with options available for both the manual 
    and automatic transmissions.
With a wheelbase of 2650mm, the Cerato trumps more expensive 
    competitors. Its generous wheelbase equates to a spacious interior. 
    Rear passengers have ample leg and headroom. In addition, the flat 
    floor design at the rear means passengers seated at the centre will 
    feel comfortable with the additional leg space.
Up front, the modern and contemporary dashboard design 
    compliments the handsome exterior. The materials used might not 
    feel like the highest quality but Kia has taken the trouble to 
    offer a classy interior ambience in the Cerato nonetheless thanks 
    to the use of red illumination and well-thought out switchgear.
The driving position is extremely adjustable thanks to height 
    adjustment for the seat and a tilt and telescopic steering column. 
    The latter is a rarity in the Cerato’s price segment.
Powering the Cerato’s front wheels is the same1.6-litre 
    four-cylinder motor from the previous Cerato. The 1591cc unit makes 
    a pretty healthy 124bhp, making it one of the most powerful cars in 
    the 1.6-litre class.
Performance is sufficient if not brisk. Kia quotes a 0-100km/h 
    time of 12 seconds dead for the four-speed automatic model tested 
    here. Out on the road, the engine is a willing performer, offering 
    a nice spread of torque at all speeds. Refinement is not its 
    particular ‘forte’ though as it can 
    sound a tad harsh when worked hard.
The four-speed automatic gearbox is fast shifting and efficient 
    enough but the lack of an additional ratio or two will ultimately 
    hurt performance and fuel economy a tad. On the upside, it offers a 
    ‘+/-‘manual mode that ought to satisfy keener drivers.
Despite its relatively simple struts and torsion beam suspension 
    set-up, the Cerato offers a well-damped and comfortable ride. In 
    fact, its impressive ride quality feels like that of a bigger 
    model’s body control in the corners is decent as well and 
    electronic stability control is a standard feature on the model 
    available here.
A major letdown of this car’s dynamics is the steering. The 
    electro-hydraulic assisted helm offers little feels and worse 
    still, its self-centering feels too artificial for it to be a 
    rewarding drive.
The engine offers sufficient performance while there is a nice 
    fancy feel to the way it rides. Other than the steering and the 
    slightly hard materials in the cabin, there is hardly anything to 
    nitpick in the Cerato.
