Race for super ships: Seamanship goes electronic
New and serving mariners are now contending with high-tech 
    electronic systems in various aspects of navigation. There are 
    several computers for the bridge and engine room operation and 
    control. Several developments have taken place through digital 
    technology in the maritime industry 
    -including satellite communications, software, navigation 
    technology and pirate detection and deterrence. Whether the mariner 
    is serving on a tanker, container ship, cruise, dry bulk, military 
    or offshore sectors on deep sea, the challenge is working out what 
    technology to buy and how to get the most out of it - improving 
    safety, operational efficiency and quality of life onboard.
Maritime expert,Captain Bernard 
    Anazoh,said a lot of information 
    technologies and electronic technologies are applied to the 
    shipping industry to enhance the safety of all kinds of ships as 
    more as ever before.
He said the mechanics used to design new ships had helped to 
    cut-down travel time. For instance, aging fleet which used to 
    complete a one-way inter-island voyage in 24 hours have been 
    replaced by modern second-hand vessels that could travel from port 
    A to port B in 12 to 15 hours. Anazoh said in the past seamen 
    worked with the Chronometer and the Sextant, but these have been 
    downgraded for the use of radar alarms, satellite navigation 
    systems, and satellite communications systems.
As a result,he said the new 
    ships require the crew to be versed in the use of modern 
    navigational and safety equipment like the Global Maritime Distress 
    Signal System (GMDSS). The GMDSS basically guides the ships and 
    maritime authorities when conducting search and rescue operations 
    during sea disasters and accidents. The Managing Director, Elkins 
    Marine Training Inter-national, Dr Hugh Nwaneri, said modern 
    seamanship is IT or Information Technology, oriented with computers 
    and electronics now finding space on the ships.
The maritime communications expert said the modern seafarers 
    should master the traditional and modern seamanship 
    andsafety management as well 
    as the skills of operating computers.The maritime expert said new 
    technologies are applied on vessels with the intelligent diesel 
    engine, automatic navigation system, automatic engine-room, and 
    automatic cargo-handling system. Nwaneri said these advanced ships 
    and equipment call for high-quality crew with specialized knowledge 
    and skills.
He said this days, seafarers’ have transited from paper to 
    electronic charts.
As there is tremendous attempt to replace aging fleet with 
    modern ones, so is there tremendous investment in navigational 
    electronics. For local shipping companies, it is a great burden 
    meet the demand of electronic navigation.
Shipowners prefer second-hand vessels than new buildings because 
    of lack of funds.
They would rather make an outlay on converting some portions of 
    the ships to passenger space than acquiring modern equipment.
TheMaritime expert 
    , said modern ships are seaworthy, 
    fuel-efficient, environment friendly, and manned by competent 
    seafarers.
Nwaneri said the shipping industry has been revolutionized with 
    the introduction of better navigational electronics.
He said navigational electronics has been made to comply to the 
    International Safety Management (ISM) Code.
The Code simply institutionalises the measures and programs that 
    would ensure the safety operation of vessels by improving manpower, 
    technical and environmental management of the vessels.
He said complying to ISM is a lesser burden and sound commercial 
    investment as it involves no ship construction, only about system, 
    about people and safety. As the necessary technology is already 
    available, Nwaneri said ship owners must make efforts to meet the 
    challenge.
According to him,new 
    navigational system are being simplified to help shore and offshore 
    operations.
He stressed that sound basic seamanship is necessary and that 
    the modern seafarer need knowledge of information technology to be 
    able to obtain the most effective navigational information from the 
    system for appropriate navigational decision-making.
Nwaneri said the challenge for the shipping industry is to 
    manage the introduction of advanced technology in ways which will 
    benefit navigational safety whilst, at the same time, reduce the 
    burden on the navigator. To international experts, navigation is an 
    old skill that cannot be replaced by modern technology.
The Rector,Maritime Academy of 
    Nigeria,Oron said training of 
    seafarers must improve to get them to he highest positions on the 
    types of ships that they choose.
He emphasized that it is necessary for institutions to run 
    training courses recognize new technologies and regulations 
    concerning ship handling, safety and pollution prevention and meet 
    the requirements that are dynamically changing and penetrating in 
    marine transport and technology.
Ebong said seafarers education and training are 
    internationalised, and because of this,it is a necessity to follow worldwide standards to 
    achieve the expectation of International Convention on Standards of 
    Training, Certification and Watchkeeping
