Tackling energy scarcity in Katsina
Recently, the Katsina State Government inaugurated four biogas 
    alternative energy pilot projects, as part of efforts to exploit 
    renewable energy sources in the state.
This followed its concern about massive degradation of its land 
    through felling of trees, which brought about near total dependence 
    on firewood as source of cooking in the rural and most of urban 
    homes.
The decision to establish the projects also came up as a result 
    of the government’s desire to protect the environment, check 
    incessant felling of tress, provide alternative source of energy 
    and supplement the electricity supply.
The pilot projects were established in Sabon Layi, Sabon Gari, 
    Mazojin Fulani and Kwanar Gobirawa villages in Kurfi, Charanchi, 
    Daura and Kankara local government areas, respectively.
The project utilizes biodegradable wastes to provide high 
    quality clean fuel in the form of biogas to be used for household 
    cooking and electricity generation.
Although the positive result of the project, which intend to 
    impact on the rural populace may not be seen immediately, it will 
    bring a change in the condition of the local environment in the 
    near future.
Speaking at the inauguration of the project at Sabon Layi, the 
    state governor, Alhaji Ibrahim Shema, said the biogas project was 
    aimed at putting in place cheap and affordable means of generating 
    electricity and domestic fuel for the people.
Shema said the project would particularly aid efforts to check 
    deforestation, desert encroachment and energy scarcity, while 
    reducing global warming caused by emission of greenhouse gases such 
    as carbon monoxide.
Inaugurating the project, Gov. Babangida Aliyu of Niger, 
    said the facilities will go a long way in checking the menace of 
    desertification.’’
He urged northern state governors to take a cue from the State 
    and look for cheaper and more affordable sources of energy for 
    their people.
The State Commissioner for Works, Alhaji Musa Sada, said N14 
    million was spent on the establishment of the projects.
He said government was considering additional sites for more 
    biogas projects, stressing that the aim of the program was to 
    enlighten people on its significance.
Sada said people would be encouraged to establish such projects 
    in their houses as "it costs an individual not more than 
    N48,000 to get one".
Also, the Special Adviser to the State Governor on Resource 
    Development, Alhaji Musa Nashuni, said the state government was set 
    to establish a Biogas Research Centre.
The centre, according to him, will check desert encroachment as 
    well as help in sourcing cheap means of generating energy for 
    electricity and domestic purposes.
Nashuni said the centre would also help in sourcing other means 
    of energy to discourage people from felling of trees "so as to 
    control the speed at which desert encroaches the state".
The effort did not stop at biogas project as the state 
    government has under its Alternative Energy Program, purchased 500 
    Briquette stoves for distribution to the people.
The components of the stove would be fabricated locally as raw 
    materials were discovered in the state in large quantity.
Biogas project had been tested and found very useful in many 
    countries, including India, where more 150 million people, far more 
    than Nigeria’s population, use it for electricity and other 
    domestic purposes.
In Nigeria, researches on biogas had been conducted and tested 
    by the Energy Research Centre, Usman Danfodio University, Sokoto 
    and other institutions.
Raw materials, which included Cow and chicken dung is available 
    in all parts of the state due to large stock of animals.
"Nigeria can as well adopt it, especially in the rural 
    areas, where electricity is very scarce,’’ Mallam Shehu abdullahi, 
    a resident of Sabon Layi, Kurfi, said.
Although very few villagers could afford N48,000 to set up the 
    plant, he urged the government to subsidizing the cost for a wider 
    patronage.
But the state government has announced that it would enhance 
    effort towards finding alternative energy source to the people of 
    the state.
It further announced its collaborating with the federal 
    government to establish a 10-megawatts windmill electricity project 
    to ensure adequate provision of electricity in the state.
"Already land has been provided for the project in Katsina 
    to enable its immediate take up,’’ the state governor said.
Similarly, the state government has adopted the use of solar 
    energy in some places including street and traffic lights and other 
    establishment that require continued electricity supply.
The whole idea is to discourage people from felling of trees as 
    well as check desert encroachment.
In 2008, the State Government planted 1.5 million 
    assorted trees as part of its afforestation program while three 
    million trees seedlings were planted this year.
To sustain the various projects, the state government had 
    commenced train-the-trainer program to enable its personnel go into 
    the rural area and teach people how to construct Biogas turbine at 
    lowest cost.
Similarly, some were taught how to construct briquette stoves 
    parts to make it available to the rural populace.
Experts, however, said the effort will not be achieved without a 
    sustained political will.
"We are used to having sound program but due of lack of 
    political will, they were either abandoned or dropped in the mid 
    way.’’ NAN)
