City buses? Check out Westsar
In its bid to reinforce the future of transportation 
    and support various government initiatives aimed at enhancing 
    transportation, Weststar Associates, the authorised sole 
    distributor of Mercedes-Benz in Nigeria, has introduced various 
    city bus models, writes TAJUDEEN ADEBANJO.
Mercedes-Benz distributor Weststar Associates seems to have seen 
    the future of transportation.
One of the oldest bus makers in the world and a market leader in 
    this product category, has just introduced the city bus to improve 
    transportation system, thereby easing difficulties people face 
    daily .
The city bus models, based on the famous Mercedes-Benz OF1721 
    chassis, offers up to 50 seats with a strong focus on complete 
    solutions for bus customers, such as logistics and fleet management 
    schemes, professional services and genuine spare parts supply.
With the introduction of these buses, travelling should be more 
    comfortable and stylish.
Their legendary suspension, reliability and safety are 
    complemented by the superior dynamics of the buses. There is 
    optimism that customers and potential buyers who patronise them 
    will get value for money.
In addition, Weststar has introduced a new generation of 26-30- 
    seater buses. The Mercedes-Benz buses are built on the chassis 
    LO812 and LO915 to guarantee maximum travel comfort.
Due to their short wheelbase, the buses are very easy to 
    maneuver, making them ideal for narrow streets and areas without 
    sufficient infrastructure.
Equipped for bad roads and offering excellent quality - typical 
    of the Mercedes-Benz brand –the 
    buses are also ideal for city transport, school and staff 
    transport, intercity travel purposes and executive travel.
The Corporate Communications Officer, Weststar Associates, Miss 
    Bukola Ogunnowo, said the bus market in Nigeria is witnessing a 
    tremendous change.
The revolution, she noted, fuelled by government zeal to improve 
    infrastructure to redefine the mass transportation system.
As links between far-flung places strengthen, there is the need 
    for increase in mass transit vehicles to move people and goods in 
    style, comfort and safety.
To enhance the performances of the buses, 
    Mercedes-Benz/Weststar, in conjunction with their strategic 
    partners, is ensuring that professional training is given about 
    buses, such as Marcopolo, Busscar, Caio, Neobus and Mascarello, to 
    fleet owners and drivers. There is, also, technical training to 
    guarantee professional operations of the buses at all times.
"Weststar is therefore poised to boost the government’s 
    transport initiatives by making these buses available in 
    Nigeria," Miss Ogunnowo noted.
In recent years, the buses have remained the most successful in 
    their category. They feature unique characteristics, such as 
    elegant body work, relatively clean emissions, noticeable lower 
    fuel consumption and easy maintenance.
