Toyota Camry reshapes for 2010
With a mid-size four-door sedan offered in four trim 
    levels, award-winning Toyota Camry has received a number of updates 
    to become a force to reckon with in 2010. Top among them is a 
    2.5-litre four-cylinder base engine that replaces the 
    previous 2.4-litre unit and comes in two versions, writes 
    TAJUDEEN ADEBANJO 
The 2010 Toyota Camry has all the character of a reliable 
    machine behind the wheel. Roomy cabin, extraordinarily refined and 
    fuel-efficient V6, quiet and cushy ride, excellent crash test 
    records among others.
The changes include a restyled grille and taillights, a new 
    optional audio system with satellite radio and Bluetooth for base 
    and LE models, and auto up/down windows on all four doors.
Stability control is now standard across the model range.
Award winning Camry receives a number of updates for 2010, chief 
    among them a new 2.5-liter four-cylinder base engine that 
    replaces the previous 2.4-liter unit and comes in two 
    versions (the SE gets the more powerful version).
Also, both the manual and automatic transmissions now have six 
    speeds instead of five.
The 2010 Toyota Camry is a midsize four-door sedan offered in 
    four trim levels - base, LE, SE and XLE.
The base Camry comes only with a four-cylinder engine, while the 
    other trims offer a choice between the four-cylinder and a V6.
The base Camry features 16-inch steel wheels, air-conditioning, 
    auto up/down windows for all four doors, a six-speaker CD audio 
    system with an auxiliary input jack, a tilt-and-telescoping 
    steering wheel, cruise control, full power accessories and a 60/40 
    split-folding rear seat. The Camry LE adds keyless entry and an 
    eight-way power driver seat.
The SE includes a sport-tuned suspension, 17-inch alloy wheels, 
    and special interior and exterior styling details.
The luxurious XLE reverts to the LE’s softer suspension settings 
    and 16-inch wheels while providing an upgraded JBL-branded sound 
    system with an in-dash CD changer and satellite radio, Bluetooth 
    phone and music connectivity.
It also proud of automatic dual-zone climate control, a power 
    passenger seat, an auto-dimming rearview mirror, reclining rear 
    seats, a moon roof, wood-tone accents and, on the V6 model, leather 
    seating.
Note that neither the SE nor the XLE offers the folding rear 
    seat, though each has a center pass-through.
Most of the XLE’s upgrades are offered on the lower trim levels 
    as options.
Other major options, depending on trim level, include a sunroof, 
    a navigation system, keyless ignition and entry and heated front 
    seats.
All Camrys are front-wheel drive, and the standard engine on 
    base, LE and XLE trim levels is a 2.5-liter four-cylinder 
    that generates 169 hp, 11 more than the previous 2.4-liter 
    four.
Optional on all models except for the base Camry is a 3.5-liter V6 that cranks out 268 horse power and 248 lb-ft of 
    torque. A six-speed automatic is the sole transmission choice.
