Visafone launches call hunting service
VISAFONE, at the weekend said that in its desire to improve the 
    quality of customer care service of its clients, it has launched 
    the Visafone call hunting service.
The call haunting service, according to the company was designed 
    for businesses which seek better customer care experience for its 
    clients.
It is especially targeted at corporate organizations, small and 
    medium sized Enterprises, non-governmental non-profit making 
    organizations, among others
The product functions through the linking of up to ten numbers 
    to a call group with one pilot which serves as an umbrella number, 
    to be the advertised. This is a welcome substitute for the series 
    of numbers usually publicized on business cards, flyers, posters, 
    television adverts and radio jingles.
Explaining the product, Visafone officials noted that 
    “when a call is made, it is automatically routed to a free 
    line within the group, saving the customer the time of trying 
    several numbers and the chance of forming an unpleasant opinion of 
    the company’s customer care if it takes many trials to get through 
    or if calls are missed. This also presents the organization as very 
    efficient.
With a pilot number which may be in the gold (special) 
    number category, the product supports calls in a linear order by 
    connecting in a definite sequence such that when a number is busy, 
    the call is automatically routed to the next in the 
    group.
The circular order, which is another option, operates 
    through the connection of calls to numbers which have previously 
    not received calls until every number in the group has been 
    connected to a call.
This option proposes a call circle whereby every 
    telephone in the group receives a call and not necessarily the 
    first available ones. The pilot number may be an easy to remember 
    one such that clients and customers easily retain the access 
    numbers to the organizations”.
Visafone also explained that the call hunting service is aimed 
    at giving small, growing and large organizations, the opportunity 
    for an effectively managed call and customer service unit while 
    attending to several customers at the same time and totally 
    eliminating the chances of failed or missed calls.
