Inadequate infrastructure threatens digital television 
    broadcast
The nation’s Vision 2012 for digital television 
    broadcast is threatened by inadequate infrastructure. Stakeholders 
    say the realisation of the concept depends on the provision of 
    necessary framework and infrastructure by the government. CHUKS UDO 
    OKONTA reports.
WILL the digitisation of television broadcast 
    be realistic by June 17, 2012?
This is a pertinent question on the mind of stakeholders, as 
    they are worried on the state of infrastructure on which the 
    concept is to be delivered.
Industry observers believe the concept can only be effective if 
    challenges such as, poor power supply, inadequate bandwidth, 
    inconsistence government’s policies, inadequate skilled personnel 
    and more, are appropriately tackled.
Nigeria in 2007, aligned with the International 
    Telecommunications Union (ITU) resolution to phase out analogue 
    television broadcast by 2015.
To achieve the concept, President, Umaru Musa Yar’Adua endorsed 
    the nation’s Vision 2012 digitisation policy in December 2007. But 
    The Nation’s investigation has revealed that 
    since the endorsement, the white paper for the implementation of 
    the policy has not been released by the government.
A source at the National Broadcast Commission (NBC) told 
    The Nation that the commission is waiting for 
    the contents of the white paper to be inplemented.
Digital television is a new way of transmitting high quality 
    video and audio signals to viewers’ television sets. The platform 
    enables operators transmit high definition television images, 
    compact disc, quality surround audio and new services such as 
    multicasting, that is having more than one programme on the same 
    channel; as well as data casting which is electronic programme 
    guides and interactive television.
The device allows a minimum of four programmes and channels to 
    be transmitted simultaneously from a station using the same 
    bandwidth originally used for a single programme or channel on 
    analogue transmission platform. It offers variety of services such 
    as; multimedia, banking, home shopping 
    and faster rates of data transmission.
The Head, Public Affairs, National Broadcasting Commission (NBC) 
    Mr. Awwalu Salihu in an interview with The 
    Nation, said operators on paid television have fully 
    embraced the digital platform, adding that those on the analogue 
    platform are 70 per cent compliant.
He said the concept would transform television broadcast, adding 
    that it will make most television sets presently used obsolete. 
    Viewers will have no choice than to buy televisions that are 
    compliant.
Said Salihu: "Presently all the paid television providers 
    are transmitting on the digital platform; we are on the last state 
    trying to transform the operations of those on analogue platform to 
    full digitisation.
"Those on analogue platform are 70 per cent and we are 
    interested in moving them to the next level, which we believe 
    should be done properly to forestall creating problems for the 
    operators.
The Director, Media and Information, National Open University of 
    Nigerian and former officer, National Broadcasting Commission (NBC) 
    Dr. Ronke Ogunmakin, "You can have the best technology, 
    but if you do not have the structures to sustain it, you are 
    wasting you time.
"In my office I have lots of electronic gadgets, but if I 
    do not have power supply and skill to drive them, it is good as not 
    having them.
"If you have skilled people that are technology driven 
    without infrastructure to support them you would not achieve 
    any thing."
She said that Nigerians, especially the youths are embracing 
    information and communications technology, but their effort is 
    deterred by lack of adequate infrastructure to propel the sector, 
    adding that Nigerians spend more resources to achieve little 
    because of inadequate infrastructure.
"Nigerians are embracing information and communications 
    technology with the aim of improving their lives and services, but 
    their efforts are deterred by the services of the power sector, as 
    servers can’t function effectively due to power failure.
"At cyber café, instead of spending five minutes you will 
    spend five to six hours on the due to the speed of the services 
    provided by the internet operators.
"Technology is not the issue, but the factors that allows 
    technology to be effective and sustainable; they are what make 
    digitisation effective. So, we have to go back to governance. The 
    government that wants cutting-edge technology should be able to 
    provide infrastructure that will make digitisation sustainable.
"Our challenges are enormous; imagine if you want to fast 
    track a process, you would have the power supply to do it, you 
    cannot watch television, without using a generator, there call 
    drops and SMS message often times are not deliver the day they are 
    sent. Considering these challenges, you would realised that the 
    issue of digitisation would work against us instead of becoming an 
    advantage.
"Note that people across the globe are looking up to us to 
    do what other nations are doing, so that we can reduce poverty, 
    reduce illiteracy and have quality of lives, because without 
    technology, we cannot have quality of lives."
Mrs. Ogunmakin noted that Nigeria has the all it takes to 
    overcome the challenges inhibiting developments, adding that it 
    behoves on the government to accept its responsibility on the 
    development of infrastructure that drives every facet of the 
    economy, adding that the nation can not thrive if infrastructure 
    isundeveloped.
Her words: "Nigeria cannot cope without the development of 
    infrastructure. What we need is just for the government to brace-up 
    and align with the trends across the globe. This is because, what 
    affects other countries also affects us too. But we are fortunate 
    that we do not have environmental disasters as observed in other 
    nations.
"We should put our house in order and tackle the enormous 
    challenges before us, especially inadequate infrastructure.
"Government should make the development of the power sector 
    a priority, because without power other sectors of the economy can 
    not work effectively. Our challenges can be solved if we develop 
    the will. We should as a nation begins to adopt measures that are 
    employed in other developed nations."
On the content provided by television service providers she 
    said: "With what I have observed, I would say that I am not 
    impressed with the content that is provided by the operators.
"I was impressed with the NBC’s resolution to licence more 
    network stations.
"In terms of content, definitely, I am not satisfied. What 
    we watch and hear in our broadcast spectrums are below 
    standards.
"To produce local content we have volumes of activities 
    that can be sychronised into rich contents. For the fact that we 
    have many ethnic groups, there are more we can talk about 
    ourselves, rather than reliance on foreign materials.
"It unfortunate, that we have abandoned what is happening 
    around us to focus on thing around which is detrimental to our 
    cultural group and mind of our children."
She said that operators should improve on their sound, picture 
    and programmes and aligns with NBC’s ratio on content delivery and 
    standard to enable them remain relevant in the scheme of modern 
    technology.
Mrs.Ogunmakin noted that service 
    consumers should always put the service providers on their toes by 
    demanding quality services.
Her words: "Nigerian should always tell service providers’ 
    what they want. Note that you can give me what you have, but I can 
    as well reject it. So, the voice of the people is very important in 
    this issue. The people should be able to say we are tired of what 
    we are seeing and we need improved services."
She said the air ways belong to the people, hence consumers 
    should always ask for they want, adding that to achieve improve 
    television services the regulators and the consumers must work 
    together.
