Glo self-care IVR now in local languages
Globacom’s new Self care service which enables subscribers 
    access information about the network’s services via the telephone 
    is now available in local languages.
A statement by the company’s Director of Customer Care, Ms Maria 
    Svensson, stated that the service can now be accessed in Hausa, 
    Igbo and Yoruba languages.
The Interactive Voice Response (IVR) service, the first such 
    offer in the market, gives subscribers the opportunity of learning 
    about the company and its activities without going to the website 
    or calling the Glo Call Centre on 121 or 200 to speak with a 
    customer care representative.
Through the offer, customers can dial in and listen to basic 
    static information on Glo products and services including its rich 
    bouquet of value added services, promotional offers, SIM 
    replacement and special numbers, among other things.
"Our customers can now enjoy the service in English 
    and Nigerian languages by dialing 500 or 5001 for English language, 
    5002 for Yoruba, 5003 for Hausa and 5004 for Igbo," Ms 
    Svensson said.
She explained that the service was introduced in the local 
    languages to afford those not comfortable with English the 
    opportunity to also enjoy its benefits.
"When we launched the service a month ago, we 
    promised to beef it up with additional offers. The local language 
    option is one such offer. We kept our promise to introduce this a 
    few weeks after its launch. We also plan other features such as 
    information on Account Balance enquiry," she added.
Ms Svensson restated that the Glo IVR service eliminates waiting 
    time on the Call Centre lines and provides an option to people who 
    cannot access the website due to lack of internet access. The 
    service is also offered free of charge.
Globacom’s Customer Care Department compares with the best in 
    the world. It is equipped with the latest technology and is manned 
    by well trained and highly motivated staff.
The department is currently being expanded and will on 
    completion of the project be the largest customer care centre in 
    Africa.
