FaceBook; Perfect Time Waster 
    or Perfect Social Networking Site
An Arab Proverb suggests that in other to get the attention of 
    others it is often wise to have a different opinion. Though may 
    bring with it controversy, is often gets you noticed. This is what 
    Facebook, has done over the years.
So what is Facebook? How did it come about? Why is so hugely 
    popular? What are the merits and demerits of using it? This essay 
    will take a look at these questions and seek to explore why 
    Facebook has become the “in-thing” in the world today.
Facebook is simply a social networking website owned and 
    operated by Facebook, Inc., a company with its headquarters 
    in Palo Alto, California. It is free and accessible anywhere in the 
    world and its users (now put at over 200 million) join the network 
    by signing up at the website, www.facebook.com .
According to Compete.com, Facebook is the most used 
    social network by global monthly active users. It was founded on 
    February 4th 2004 by Havard 
    University computer scientists Mark Zuckerberg, Dustin Moskovitz 
    and Chris Hughes. It is believed that the name of the website was 
    drawn from the name of a book given to incoming students at 
    Phillips Exeter Academy - the high school alma mater of Mark 
    Zuckerberg. Though, initially membership of Facebook was restricted 
    to only Harvard students, it later expanded to other colleges in 
    the Boston area; the Ivy League and Stanford University. However, 
    now the website currently has more than 200 million active users 
    worldwide.
Why is Facebook so hugely popular? There are many reasons why 
    this is the case. Firstly, it is free and has an easy to use 
    interface that allows even the least internet savvy individual to 
    access it. It’s many features, 
    attributes and customization makes it stand out from the many 
    social networking sites that existed before it. For instance, after 
    signing up, users can join networks organized by city, workplace, 
    school, and region to connect and interact with friends and other 
    people alike. It also allows users to add friends, send and receive 
    messages, upload and share pictures and photos of events, videos 
    and clips, websites and links and update their personal profiles to 
    notify friends about themselves. Most importantly the level of 
    customization of Facebook unike 
    other social networking sites is what makes it stand out. While 
    Facebook allows the flexibility of using plain text to interact, 
    navigate and customize their personal profiles and information, 
    other sites for instance MySpace only allow the use of HTML and 
    Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) which require some knowledge of 
    programming.
Other features on Facebook include; 
    Wall (which allows friends to post messages for the user to see and 
    vice versa), News Feed, Pokes, Notes, videos and Photos to mention 
    but few. With these features users communicate with one another and 
    share items online throughout the world in a manner never before 
    witnessed on the internet. Facebook has become a very important 
    medium for many people around the world. For instance parties, 
    events, meetings and appointments have are organized using 
    Facebook. One good example, the recent demonstrations and protests 
    against the election results in Iran which took place around Europe 
    were organized via the events feature on Facebook. All these have 
    helped to increase the popularity and versatility of the 
    website.
And now to the bitter sweet side of Facebook. The next question 
    is what are the merits of using Facebook? Though many will beg to 
    differ, Facebook like everything human ingenuity has created has 
    its merits and demerits. The versatility of Facebook is undoubtedly 
    evident. It has helped re-unite many long lost friends and 
    acquaintances together. Millions of messages are sent and received, 
    pictures and photos shared, details and profiles viewed every 
    minute of the day between friends. Many people are thus brought 
    into contact with one another to interact, share ideas, information 
    and the opportunity to meet other new people every day. Old 
    acquaintances keep in touch and are constantly aware of the 
    progress and happenings in the lives of their friends. In the 
    process the site also helps to build and strengthen social cycles 
    among diverse cultures, and across wide ethnic and racial lines 
    thus ensuring global integration and healthy relationships in the 
    cyber world and the world in general. This is an amazing 
    achievement considering that Facebook is only five years in 
    existence. Speaking from experience, I have been able to meet and 
    interact with many old classmates who now live thousands of miles 
    away from me. It has been an absolutely wonderful experience.
However, all good things have a bad side regardless of the 
    intentions behind their creation. It is a common fact that all 
    human inventions also have been known to have some bad sides albeit 
    due to some inherent weaknesses or loopholes often preyed upon by 
    evil doers and opportunists. Sadly, one of the many demerits of 
    using Facebook is that it can often time consuming. Many people 
    have become addicted to using it and often spend hours chatting and 
    interacting with other users which in my opinion is rather 
    unhealthy for productivity. Some even steal valuable office time at 
    work to check updates on Facebook and the updated statuses of their 
    mates and friends. Little wonder some firms 
    ; organizations and nations have banned it from their 
    computer networks and systems. As with most computer applications, 
    Facebook is vulnerable to cyber crime.
Only recently, users started receiving spam mails from unknown 
    sources disguised as friends. This has helped raise the long 
    neglected question about the safety of user’s data and profile 
    information and the risks of identity theft. Though this might 
    sound a little farfetched or perhaps exaggerated in the eyes of the 
    casual user; it can be potentially disastrous in the long term. So 
    is Facebook safe? The owners will have us believe it is but with 
    the increasing wave of cyber crime around the world, one can never 
    be too careful.
Thus it is important that users only share their personal 
    information with people they absolutely trust and be cautious of 
    unknown users who want to be friends with them. Another point which 
    counts as a minus for Facebook is the ease with which people add 
    people (sometimes unknown) to their friends list. Once I did a 
    random questioning of my friends at University asking them if they 
    could say with confidence that they knew everyone in their friends 
    list. Many honestly said no, but that they simply connect with 
    anyone that “requests to add” them on Facebook. The trend is 
    widespread on Facebook and evermore increases the risks of using 
    it.
Furthermore, it has been reported that certain users may have 
    either used it or tried to use it to defraud others. A good example 
    reported on the website of a popular European newspaper, revealed 
    that, the daughter’s of the US President were almost victims of 
    some sort of cybercrime via the site. Though this cannot be 
    explicitly confirmed it still raises eye brows and pertinent 
    questions on the need for users to “more” careful with their 
    personal details on the internet especially social networking 
    sites. Issues such as these have often thrown Facebook into some 
    controversy over the past few years. It is often seen in many 
    countries especially in nationalistic and propaganda loving nations 
    as a tool for political dissent especially because the youth often 
    embrace it so strongly. This explains why it has been blocked 
    intermittently in several countries including Syria and Iran.
In summary, Facebook like many internet social websites has many 
    advantages and disadvantages. As enumerated by this essay, the 
    advantages are numerous and so are the drawbacks. In has been 
    branded the “perfect time waster” by employees, which explains why 
    it has been banned at many places of work. Many other pertinent 
    issues need to be addressed; privacy remains an issue (since it has 
    been compromised several times), several lawsuits and litigations 
    from users and the co-founders including Zuckerberg's former 
    classmates, who claim that Facebook had stolen their source code 
    and other intellectual property. Besides all these, Facebook 
    remains a wonderful addition to the process of social networking on 
    the internet, it is here to stay. In my opinion, it is a perfectly 
    good way to waste free time, when engagements permit the user. 
    Final verdict, Facebook is networking extraordinaire, it is the 
    future of socializing on the internet – It is the “Face of a 
    Sociocyberbook”.
