How to nurture customer relationship during 
    meltdown
Step one: Decide that you want to have more fun in your 
    job
Traditional wisdom says that the purpose of having better 
    customer relationships is to sell more products to those customers. 
    However, while higher sales figures are a natural by-product of 
    better customer relationships, the real reason to have better 
    customer relationships is to make the job of selling more fun and 
    fulfilling. Think about it this way: wouldn’t you rather be 
    spending time with people whom you like, and who like you in 
    return, than trying to manipulate people into buying things that 
    they may not want or need? Talking with people, and learning about 
    their lives, is inherently interesting and fun, provided your goal 
    in building a relationships isn’t self-serving. In that context, 
    selling is merely a way of helping the person with whom you have a 
    good business relationship, rather than an end in itself.
Step two: Be someone who attracts good customer 
    relationships
Customers choose to have relationships with sales reps who 
    exhibit four key attributes:
Professionalism
: There’s a huge difference between 
    professionals and amateurs. People want to do business with 
    individuals who are serious about what they do, and who are willing 
    to take the time to achieve a deep understanding of their craft. A 
    good way to increase your level of professionalism is to read the 
    trade journals for your industry that hone your business 
    skills.
Integrity: Integrity is being as good as 
    your word. If you say you’re going to do something, then your 
    customer knows it will be done. Integrity is also exhibited when 
    you’re willing to take a stand, even when it’s unpopular with you 
    customer or your company. That does not mean being adversarial, but 
    rather having the ability to make decisions based upon what you 
    know is right.
Caring: People value relationships with 
    people who care about them. A good way to show that you care about 
    a customer is to listen, really listen, to what the customer has to 
    say.
Knowledge: People respect people who have 
    some kind of unique knowledge. This doesn’t mean that you become an 
    expert on every product or service that you sell, but it does mean 
    that you have knowledge that is of value to the customer.
Step three: Align your thoughts and behaviours to reliably 
    generate trust
Who you are is only half of the equation. Your ability to build 
    customer relationships will also depend upon your thought processes 
    about yourself, about customers and about the process of selling. 
    Ideally you want all three of these aligned and congruent. Here’s 
    how.
Integrate the right mind-set
. If you want people around you to value having 
    a relationship with you, you must truly believe that relationship 
    building is important. You must also believe that you honestly have 
    something of value to offer.
Get curious about people. People are drawn 
    to those who show true interest in them. Curiosity about people is 
    thus a crucial element of relationship building. Having an abiding 
    fascination in others gives you the opportunity to learn new things 
    and make new connections.
Be reliable in your actions. A customer’s 
    ability to trust you, and thus be willing to have a relationship 
    with you, is dependent upon showing the customer that your 
    behaviour is consistent and persistent over time. When a customer 
    can predict your behaviour, that customer is more likely to invest 
    you with trust.
Step four: Approach meetings as relationship-building 
    opportunities
Every customer meeting is an opportunity to build or strengthen 
    the relationship, provided you remember that the messenger (who you 
    are) is much more important than the message (what you to say). In 
    fact, far from being a "sales pitch
    ," a customer meeting 
    should be a quest to come up with ways that you the customer can 
    help each other to become more successful. To do this, you must 
    follow the following three touchstones.
Seek the truth
. You want to 
    fine out if you really have something that can help the 
    customer. To do this, the meeting must be a quest to discover the 
    real areas where the two of you can work together. Quick tip: your 
    customer knows that you’re telling the truth when you’re not afraid 
    where to say something negative (the true) about your product or 
    company.
Keep an open mind
. When you walk into a customer meeting 
    absolutely convinced that the customer needs your product or 
    service, the customer will sense you’re close-minded and become 
    close-minded in return. If, by contrast, you’re open to the idea 
    that the customer might be better served elsewhere, the customer 
    will sense that you’ve got his or her best interests at heart and 
    will be more likely to listen to what you have to 
    say.
Have a real dialogue. A customer meeting 
    should be a conversation, not a mere sales call. This means that 
    you should be listening to the customer at least half of the time 
    that’s spent at the meeting. Furthermore, the dialogue should be 
    substantive and about real business issues, not just office patter 
    or chit-chat about sport.
Step five: Maintain and deepen relationships with 
    inexpensive, thoughtful acts
A good way to show that you care about people is to notice their 
    interests and then fine small ways 
    to make them happy. For example, suppose your best customer is a 
    big football fan. You might call up the local newspaper in your 
    area (where the team is based) and arrange to have the Sunday 
    sports section sent to that customer each week. In some cases, a 
    simple telephone call when you’re in the area – even if you don’t 
    have time to visit that customer – is enough. The key concept here 
    is "inexpensive." You want to show that you care, not 
    make the customer feel obligated to buy.
