Shopping for the right suit
Suit is the one thing every man should own. We salute its 
    ability to withstand 
    expiration.Without suits, men would have nothing. In the 
    hierarchy of style, a good suit remains a man’s only trump card. It 
    carries an air of success, taste, and sophistication. It is 
    designed to make you look better, break boundaries between social 
    classes and to make a small man tall with pinstripes or a fat man 
    rich with soft wools. The suit looks good in restaurants, trains, 
    BRT, dinner parties and of course, the office and 
    everywhere you want to be. It is, in its best forms, a complete 
    outfit that will never fail you. So why not bask in its enduring 
    appeal?
And that is exactly what it will do, if you treat it right. 
    Unfortunately the majority of suits you see look awful. This is not 
    necessary. Even if you work ten hours with your jacket on, being 
    mindful of your clothing will keep you ready for cocktails after 
    work. Too many men either do not care or do not know how to wear a 
    suit suitably. This is worth avoiding.
A few general rules should be observed when approaching a suit, 
    and most apply to good dressing in general.
The suit, no matter the style, needs to fit your body closely. 
    This means all pieces should be cut and tailored appropriate to 
    your form.
You are an interesting, confident, multi-hued man. Let others 
    learn that from how you behave, not from the label on your jacket. 
    A modestly, well-dressed man has never failed to impress.
Assuming you are not an investment banker, you do not need ten 
    suits; the basic four is just okay. This means you can be a 
    discerning shopper and spend time accumulating, then keeping your 
    suits in good condition (better to let the experts dry clean for 
    you or you soil it with your own hands)!
You can get your suits to buy at various shopping malls 
    nationwide. The open market is cheaper since you have a greater 
    bargaining power there. Price for suit at most shopping malls 
    begins at N25, 000. Those who sell below that will always tell you 
    that they do it as a form of sales promotion. If you have a good 
    bargaining power, you can equally get a good suit for much less in 
    some markets.
The basic four
•The standard blue:
Great for business, lunch, dinner or casual parties. It can be 
    worn with black or brown shoes, even white if you are daring. It 
    reflects well by a pool. Standard blue means navy, with no room for 
    paler shades.
•The classic gray:
Appropriate for everything and even makes a red-head look dandy. 
    Grays are also the best with patterns, especially anything in the 
    chevron family. Start with plain, move to window-pane. Even such, 
    the gray is never controversial. It is the Switzerland of suits.
•The basic black:
Our favourite and the perennial classic; it is a fit at the 
    Oscars or your sister’s wedding, the perfect compliment to a good 
    white shirt, beloved by gangsters, designers and undertakers (those 
    jobs with the highest doses of fashion-conscious aptitudes; 
    respectability, aggression, vanity, and wisdom). If you only own 
    one suit, this is it. You can even be buried in it.
•Any of the above, with pinstripes.
