How To Be Your Own Boss And Be Succesful
Last week, after my Focus on where you are going article on 
    Business class, I got 500 thank you calls, 50 commendation calls, 
    700 mails in my inbox, 250 text messsages, 17 consultation calls, 3 
    book publishing offers and 12 invitations to speak at a youth and 
    Business seminars and conferences. I was so overwhelmed that I felt 
    like calling everybody back to thank them for calling or sending 
    messages. You really cannot fathom what a single good article can 
    do?
Amongst all my mails, I noticed that 40% of them have challenges 
    or fears in starting up on their own and being their own boss. So I 
    thought I do a piece on that for this week. Being your own boss is 
    one thing but been good at it is another; you can start up on your 
    own but be a failure at it, so in that case you would have been 
    better off as an employee. I have taking time to go through my 
    history and also done research with some top Nigerian and 
    International CEO’s on the secrets of a successful boss. So when 
    you take that bold step as an entrepreneur and becoming your own 
    boss, these are the basics.
THINK OF LOTS OF IDEAS: The very first thing is, just start 
    thinking of lots of ideas. Starts reading a science fiction, 
    futurism, start watching TED... just start writing ideas 
    down. Look for a park, there are so many in Lagos now thanks to 
    Governor Fashola, take time to 
    Research, brainstorm and write down your ideas on a 
    precious piece of paper or better still your laptop, if you have 
    one.
DO NOTHING: And then, this is the crucial step, do nothing. 
    Don't do anything with those ideas. Just keep thinking of 
    ideas and writing them down, and the reason is that in three months 
    most of those ideas are going to be shit. And it's going to 
    take you at least three months, if not six to nine months to get 
    those ideas together. Too many people jump on the first ideas they 
    have and start doing them, and they shut their brain down and they 
    stop thinking of other clever things. This is my own personal test, 
    I called it the pub-test. I spent half of a year in England and 
    Brits are well-educated, which means 
    they're a very tough audience for new ideas. I go to a pub 
    with a friend, it's noisy, we're having a beer, and then 
    about 15 seconds I explain my idea. If they don't stop 
    drinking their beer and pay attention, my idea is not good 
    enough.
It's very simple. It's because a noisy pub, with beer, 
    lots of queue other people around... it's what the 
    Internet is like: there are tons of distractions, there are tons of 
    things pulling people away. Take yourself to a crowded area or a 
    noisy bar; if you're not interesting enough to get someone to 
    look up from their beer, it's not gonna happen. Try again.
RESEARCH IS A GREAT GAIN:just 
    before you decide on what you want to do, think about your 
    marketing options. For example; if you want to go into chalk making 
    business, start by going to the market and have a one on one with 
    the retailer who sells chalk. Go to a market like Oshodi or 
    Tejuosho, if you are not in Lagos, look for a local retail market 
    that consumes your idea of production. Ask him how many sales he 
    makes daily and weekly. By the time you do an analysis of his sale 
    and know the value of the demand then you think of your production 
    and supply chances on the chalk business. Besides the market, also 
    talk to your friends, especially the very blunt ones, they’ll give 
    you a better truth. Trust me, this is really a great gain.
THE ELEVATOR PITCH: Now, think about your product: what this 
    really comes down to, it's some sort of elevator pitch, some 
    sort of very simple explanation.
It's called an elevator pitch because if you're stuck 
    in an elevator with someone famous, let's say Ben Bruce or Jim 
    Ovia, and you want to speak at either of them.
What would you say in those fifteen seconds that would excite 
    him, that would make him take your card, and call you back? If you 
    can’t think of anything in your idea that you can say, then you 
    should brainstorm some more.
WRITE THE FIRST LINE OF YOUR PRESS RELEASE: I can't stress 
    this enough: before you do any work, write the first line of your 
    press release. So many Entrepreneurs’ and companies leave this 
    still later. They make the product, they get it to ship and then 
    they write the press release, and they realize that the first line 
    of their press release is boring. The product is already made, 
    there's nothing you can do: you have a boring product. You 
    need to work the other way around. How is that first line of that 
    press release going to get people interested?
WRITE THE FIRST PARAGRAPH OF YOUR HOMEPAGE: Next, think about 
    what your website will look like and write the first paragraph of 
    your homepage. This is the follow one. Someone says, "Uh, that 
    sounds interesting, tell me more". You have three or four 
    sentences to get them excited.
HUNT FOR UNIQUE NAMES: This is actually not nearly as important 
    as you would think. A lot of companies like my own Exclusive Passé 
    or even ones my NGO Yesafrica Initiative, are not the best names in 
    the world, but if they're really good ideas and they're 
    memorable, that's fine. It's not a problem 
    
DON'T BORROW MONEY: This is really crucial. Don't 
    borrow money. Figure out how to do the idea extremely cheaply. 
    There are exceptions however depending on how big your idea and 
    start up budget is, but I want to advice that you start a bit of it 
    without borrowing and see how it goes, trust me on this.
MAKE A MOCK-UP: Just like a thriller before a movie, make a 
    mock-up. Show it to people and watch their reactions, see if they 
    are really excited. You can call up your cousins, siblings, parents 
    or friends to present your mock to. Do your presentation like you 
    are before a Bank CEO who you need a business capital from. Gather 
    their reactions and comments and go back to your drawing board 
    
LAUNCH BEFORE YOU ARE READY: And this is crucial. Launch way 
    before you're ready. Get it out there. Start getting feedback. 
    See if the idea is any good, because you might be really wrong. 
    After you pitch at the bloggers, if no-one cared, if you 
    didn't borrow money, you don't have anything invested in 
    it, other than a few months' work. Kill it, start over. You 
    just learned something; you just learned why the idea was bad. 
    Start again
DON'T QUIT YOUR DAY JOB: This is also crucial: don't 
    quit your day job. A lot of people think they need to get funding, 
    quit their day jobs, start with a bunch of partners, and go off. 
    What you really need to do, is get that salary and find time on the 
    weekends, on the evenings, to work on your project, and gradually 
    lower your time commitment to your job. But only quit it once you 
    have enough money. So many people have regretted this part 
    
SALESPEOPLE ARE A BAD IDEA: You also discover that salespeople 
    are an extremely bad idea. The reason is that salespeople require 
    capital and that also generally mean that your idea isn't that 
    good. Your idea isn't that good because it requires 
    salespeople to convince people it's good. If it's good it 
    should convince people on its own. Great products build word of 
    mouth
PITCH THE BLOGGERS: Another fallacy is that if we just had a big 
    PR and marketing campaign that everyone would know about our 
    product that would be great. That's not true either. Because 
    if you can convince just a few bloggers that it's interesting, 
    and a few early users, that is something really unusual, then it 
    will happen on its own.
Now let me share my Tiny Little Secrets with you; these are some 
    of my stand out moves in the business and personal field. I call 
    them tiny little secrets because they are the very tiny we take for 
    granted and think are not relevant to what we do with a daily 
    business or personal interactive routine. I got a few case studies 
    here. This is my secret, it's really simple. The secret to 
    getting massive press, and I have got massive press for my project, 
    so the first one is the hardest
Be Interesting: Be really damned interesting. Guy Kawasaki in 
    his famous books says: "If you're not getting 
    press, get better reality". That's a more clever 
    way of saying what I'm saying, but find something really 
    interesting.
Understand the Internet power: The Internet is another great 
    place to get free advice. SCORE, for example, boasts a mentor 
    network of more than 10,000 mostly retired entrepreneurs 
    nationwide. You can search by related background and meet the 
    mentor locally or by email. You can also get feedback online from 
    12,000 peer entrepreneurs at YoungEntrepreneur.com. And seek 
    out local organizations. At 27, New Yorker Leah Alani founded 
    SophieSays.com, an online boutique for stationery and gifts 
    for special events. She gained the confidence and the practical 
    skills to accelerate the start-up date after taking a four-week 
    class with Ladies Who Launch, which has local chapters in 
    metropolitan areas.
Have a Mentor: most Nigerians 
    and Africans in General don’t understand the power of mentoring. If 
    you desire to be like Aliko Dangote in future, try and take out 
    time to research on his life and secret to his success. I have read 
    over 250 Biographies of 
    great writers and entrepreneurs’. I know what sparked off their 
    idea, their immediate and follow up challenges, how they were 
    discouraged and betrayed and how they found their silver lining to 
    becoming the big giants that they are. Its so simple, all it 
    requires is a book or some little surfing on the internet and you 
    can be in touch with your mentor.
Okay, one final tip: Do everything yourself. And if you're 
    not technical, sorry, you're going to have to be technical. 
    You're going have to learn technology at some level. Otherwise 
    it's not going to happen. You're going have to read a lot 
    of books. You got to learn everything out running a company, but 
    it's going to be a lot of fun. And if it is successful, you 
    get all the percents. You can't lead people if you don't 
    know how to do their job. Food for thoughthun!?
Next week I will take you step by step on some point you should 
    consider before you finally quit your Job and be your own CEO. Be 
    on the look out…
