Treadmill vs Outside walking
Using a motorized treadmill at home and walking out, which is 
    more beneficial in exercising? Below are some of the advantages and 
    disadvantages of each.
Walking Outside
Walking outside has its biggest advantage in challenging your 
    balance and stability with all of the small obstacles, dodges, 
    starts and stops. This will give you an advantage for distance 
    walking as well as overall health as we age — maintaining our 
    stabilizing muscles. Here is what you face walking outside vs. on a treadmill:
· Up and down curbs, steps, short stairways, and stepping over 
    small obstacles. A little workout for your climbing muscles.
· Sloped sidewalks and road sides. A challenge to your balance 
    muscles.
· Dodging people, puddles, and poodles. A challenge to move 
    side-to-side as well as forward.
· Stops and starts at street crossings. A challenge to the 
    muscles to come to a halt and to start from zero.
· Treadmills only go uphill or level, only very rare models have 
    downhill incline. Going downhill challenges muscles in a completely 
    different way.
· On the treadmill, the tread is moving and you may not be 
    giving yourself a good push off with your back foot. Concentrate on 
    doing this correctly on the treadmill.
Distance Training Outdoors vs. Treadmill
I recommend doing outside long distance mileage when training 
    for a 10K, half marathon or marathon, rather than doing it all on 
    the treadmill. Go ahead and use the treadmill for your within-week 
    workouts of 30-60 minutes and to work on your walking posture and 
    form. But for your long, slow distance mileage, do it outdoors.
On a longer distance event, your muscles will begin to tire and 
    you will need to remind yourself often of good walking form. You 
    end up with aches in odd places as you "recruit" 
    different muscles when your usual walking muscles tire. Outdoors 
    training is more likely to be using those muscles for balance, 
    stability, ups and downs than the smooth ride of the treadmill. You 
    will end up with fewer aches after your long distance events if you 
    have been doing your long slow distance training outdoors.
Incline on the treadmill — all uphill, no 
    downhill
Treadmills can be useful for adding incline if you are in an 
    area without hills, but I’ll bet you can work some stairs into your 
    workout if you look for them to help build the uphill and downhill 
    muscles. This is the big problem with treadmills — there is no 
    downhill! You use different muscles to go downhill, and I never see 
    a loop walking course where you only go uphill. You need to train 
    those downhill muscles as well.
Advantages of Treadmill vs. Outside Walking
Using a treadmill for your regular workouts is a great way to 
    burn calories and give basic training to your walking muscles and 
    practice your walking form.
· Workout Programs: You may enjoy the pre-programmed workouts 
    the treadmill offers to give you a controlled workout challenge. 
    The treadmill may also have readouts for heart rate, calories 
    burned, etc. which give you data feedback.
· More Speed = More Calories Burned: Most people set their 
    treadmill workout for time rather than for distance, and can often 
    go faster on a treadmill due to lack of obstacles.
