Do something now...!
Everyone loves a gift; a good gift if you like. In many cases, 
    when people think of giving a gift to someone, they head straight 
    to the stores. Well, what do you buy for someone when you get 
    there? Or better still, what kind of gift do you give out? This 
    brings me to my exhibit for this piece.
I know of a beautiful woman, highly placed and very influential. 
    You know the kind of influence a woman wields, whose husband is 
    highly placed in the society? Take for instance, the wife of a 
    president or a governor. No matter what she is, she becomes 
    automatically influential.
Seeing the influence First Ladies wield, beginning from Mrs 
    Mariam Babangida, many a woman would wish to be one. But it does 
    not come easy. Someone noted sometime ago that one of the easiest 
    ways for a woman to become influential is to marry a governor. But 
    I prefer the likes of Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, Florence Ita Giwa, 
    Hilary Clinton, Dora Akunyili, Abike Dabiri-Erewa and Angela 
    Merkel, because they have made a point in not merely hiding under 
    their husband’s glory and good will, but by carving a niche for 
    themselves. But I also love the likes of Oluremi Tinubu, Abimbola 
    Fashola, Turai Yar’Adua and a host of others who 
    remain beautiful, humble and accommodating despite their highly 
    placed position that grants them so much influence.
Anyway, this is not about women or First Ladies but about 
    giving. I was talking about my influential woman friend. Her 
    husband was well placed. He still is. Oh she is beautiful but I 
    call her a flawed beauty. This is because you would rather admire 
    and appreciate her from a distance. If you are my type who does not 
    like to hate, then you would stay away because you cannot avoid 
    writing her off if you get close enough to see a small display of 
    her character.
I particularly picked my flawed friend. She is far older if you 
    wish, so she is a ‘mother’ if you know 
    what I mean.
I truly love her; just meeting with an influential figure would 
    make anyone happy, how much more getting so close. I have had the 
    privilege of getting close to many and I know that all that 
    glitters is not gold.
My first dismay was with the kind of gifts she gave to people. 
    If she ever gives you any, the first advice you would get from any 
    sincere person close to her would be to check the expiry date. And 
    truly, it would have been expired.
Due to her highly placed position, it was a great deal for 
    people to receive gifts from her. The fact that it even came from 
    her would make the receiver feel very grateful. And trust 
    Nigerians, especially the Yoruba with their kneeling and 
    prostrating culture. The recipient of such gift would feel so 
    honoured that they would kneel and prostrate in reverence. Talk of 
    things that have over stayed and worn out in the kitchen store for 
    prolonged lack of use. Now seeing that they are already expired or 
    almost expired, my dear would call a lowly ‘servant’. You know, such God forsaken proud people 
    like to treat people with disdain; so what they have rejected, they 
    give out. Thus, after all the prostrations and thank you ma, they 
    realize that the gift has expired. So, why did she give it out 
    anyway? She had so much in her store, so why delay the giving out? 
    In the first place, she did not have to spend money on them. They 
    were gifts sent to the house, courtesy, her husband’s position and 
    good will.
Moreover, she travels out of the country a lot. On one occasion, 
    she came back and announced to her workers that she bought things 
    for them. Later two of them displayed the clothes she gave to 
    them-all worn out and visibly old. After many weeks, she scolded 
    them for not wearing it. How could they? If they were good enough, 
    why would they not use them?
That is also what puzzles me. You see people who were supposed 
    to have been voted into office boasting of what they have achieved, 
    while the primary need of the masses are being denied. And whose 
    money is it anyway? Why not do something worthwhile and leave a 
    legacy?
For instance, someone digs a borehole for a village and the 
    villagers dance and sing their praises while they hunger and yearn 
    for more like Oliver Twist. Here people beg for what is their due 
    and so called dividend of democracy without any coming.
To think that many of them stock these things while others 
    suffer in penury. During the N25billion banks recapitalisation 
    exercise, they all brought their money and heaped into the banks. 
    Soon after, they exported them back to foreign lands; so they also 
    did for the stock market. Why do they keep hoarding them in their 
    barns? Why don’t they let it circulate to better the country?
Indeed, Nigerian’s do not desire too much. They only ask for the 
    little things as simple amenities and their daily bread. Just as 
    many keep asking: when will the need of the common man be met? Will 
    time ever bring it to pass?
