Define your relationship to avoid putting blames on 
    others
Before I settled down to write this piece, it seemed to me as if 
    every subject affecting sistas had been 
    exhausted. Can you imagine that?
So, it was almost becoming impossible for sisters to hear from 
    me this week until I listened to Esther’s story and suddenly, it 
    dawned on me that any piece to save a single soul from taking her 
    own life is worth writing about.
I really do empathise with Esther but for heaven’s sake, how can 
    someone ever think of taking her own life? I’m trying as much as 
    possible not to sound disparaging, but not without saying that I 
    find the idea repulsive.
At one point or the other as teenagers, most of us had assumed 
    that some guys somewhere cared about us even when they hadn’t 
    actually asked. Fine! It’s all part of being a teenager, it only 
    shows we hadn’t yet matured enough to know that feelings can be put 
    into perspectives and someone who desires you, may not necessarily 
    be in love with you.
Perhaps you have heard this saying, but if you haven’t, let me 
    give you the opportunity to know that, "Assumption is 
    the mother of ignorance." About five years ago, a lady 
    I knew met this guy on her way to work. Somehow, they became 
    friends and got closer by each day.
Ope would always meet Shola at the same spot she had met him for 
    the first time and would offer to drop her at work. Soon, he 
    started showering her with gifts. I was working at that time in the 
    same complex as Shola. So, somehow, we became inseparable friends. 
    Our friendship went beyond our work place and soon we started 
    visiting each other at home. She was a nice person, very 
    hardworking and my parents liked her so much. She was living with 
    her guardians. They were very good to her but of course, she would 
    have wished she were in my shoes. She would have wished she was 
    living with her parents too. Like they say, the grass is always 
    greener on the other side.
Shola was lucky to have had Mr. and Mrs. Olajide 
    as her guardians but all that didn’t mean anything to her because 
    as far as she was concerned, she did most of the house chores while 
    their children would busy themselves with their personal things.
I remember she told me once that she couldn’t wait to get 
    married and move in with her husband. I advised her against rushing 
    into anything and that there was nothing wrong in doing most of the 
    house chores as she would do them all by herself when she is 
    married and have her children. I lived with my parents and I did 
    all the house chores too in my house and she knew it.
I wish people will learn not to see marriage as an escape valve 
    from any situation because I bet you, the person you’re running to, 
    may turn out to be your worst nightmare.
Shola paid regular visits to Ope’s house and she talked about 
    marriage more regularly. It started to bother me because she was 
    rushing things from what I perceived. I often threw questions at 
    her concerning Ope’s past relationships and I realised that she 
    already assumed the coast was clear for her since she never came 
    across another lady whenever she visited Ope.
One day, Ope visited her and she was busy. So, she asked me to 
    keep him company. In a few while we got talking. We talked about 
    things generally and we also talked about marriage plans. He said 
    he wasn’t ready to rush things because he had done so in the past. 
    I was surprised at his disclosure. Don’t ask me why?
I try to tell my friend to really dig into his last relationship 
    but she was too afraid to bring it up maybe for the fear that she 
    might rock the boat. It was a lot more convenient for her not to 
    mention it since every moment with him was pleasing. How long can 
    one live in a fool’s paradise simply because it is pleasing to do 
    so?
Shola eventually got pregnant for Ope. This time, it was not her 
    choice to hear the truth but she heard it. Ope did not take her in 
    just like she thought. I ask her what his reaction was when she 
    told him about her pregnancy. She said he asked her to keep it.
Her guardians were very disappointed in her when they found out 
    that she was pregnant. I met Ope after her guardians demanded to 
    see him and asked him what his plans were for Shola. Right in front 
    of Shola, he said he was married and his wife was in school in Ondo 
    State, that they had a quarrel and that was why she had stayed away 
    for long but that they were not divorced. He said when she told him 
    she was pregnant; he had asked her to do whatever she deemed 
    fit.
Shola was surprised to hear his man talk the way he did. Well, 
    she was yet to see the worst side of him until it was time for her 
    to be delivered of the baby.
Shola’s guardians had tried all they could to reach Ope on phone 
    after she had been taken to the hospital on that fateful day but to 
    no avail. He absconded and till date, Shola had been responsible 
    for her child alone.
Back to Esther’s case who resides in the Eastern part of the 
    country. She had lived with her guardians too and they were so nice 
    to her.
Esther is a very beautiful girl. She has the right curves in the 
    right places. Even before she finished secondary school, men 
    wouldn’t let her be. She had this neighbour, Abu, with whom she got 
    along well. They became very close friends and she usually confided 
    in him.
Just about the same time when she got admission into the 
    university, Abu also relocated to Lagos to look for job. Three 
    months after, he got a very good job, got a car and an apartment 
    for himself.
Abu and Esther kept in touch all the while. He was like a big 
    brother to her and a relationship was the last thing on her mind. 
    In her second year in school, Abu invited her to Lagos to come and 
    spend part of her semester holiday with him. She obliged him and 
    came from school to his house during their break.
When she arrived on that fateful Saturday morning, Abu was just 
    getting out of bed. They spent all day gisting. After dinner that 
    evening, Abu retired into the living-room. Esther finished her 
    dinner, hoping to come and join him in the living-room to watch the 
    evening News. But to her amazement, he was watching an ex-rated 
    movie (blue film). She was speechless. He asked her to join him if 
    she didn’t mind. She had barely sat for three minutes when she 
    realised that she was horny. She quickly got up and went into the 
    toilet to clean up and to compose herself before Abu noticed her. 
    As she opened the door, she saw Abu standing stark naked in front 
    of the door, his manhood stretching out hard before him. Before she 
    could protest, she found herself in his arm. "I enjoyed every 
    bit of it and it didn’t stop after that first time," she 
    confided in me.
He didn’t make any commitment that first day and he still didn’t 
    for the whole week I spent in his house but I just assumed he 
    wanted a relationship and that was it. I didn’t ask any questions 
    because I wasn’t even prepared to hear otherwise.
Esther came visiting the second time but this time the story was 
    different. As she got to the door to Abu’s apartment, she heard 
    voices and pulse to figure out what it was. He was in a hot 
    argument with a lady. She was pregnant and he was denying the 
    pregnancy. She summoned courage and entered as the door wasn’t 
    locked. She met him beating the young girl mercilessly. She tried 
    to stop him but she couldn’t. After he was satisfied, he left 
    her.
The girl refused to leave. She went into his bedroom and slept 
    off. Esther slept in another room but Abu came and dragged her into 
    his room where the other girl was sleeping and made love to her 
    right beside the girl.
The following day, Esther left for school. While in school, 
    Esther discovered she was pregnant for Abu and had to come back to 
    Lagos to tell him about it. When she finished, he didn’t say 
    anything to her. She stayed a few days more but for every slightest 
    provocation Abu would beat her. She couldn’t take it again and 
    decided she was going back to school.
Abu took ill the morning she was supposed to leave. It was 
    really bad; she had to help him to the hospital. The doctor called 
    both of them into his office and began to counsel them before 
    eventually telling Abu that he was infected with HIV. Esther almost 
    collapsed right there on the spot. After the doctor had revived 
    her, he counseled her and they left.
Now, Esther’s world has changed. She has not been able to 
    forgive herself. "I am going to commit suicide but before I 
    do, I will teach men a lesson. I will spread the virus for little 
    or no cost and when I’m satisfied, I will end this miserable life 
    of mine," she said.
Let’s even assume that Abu catch the deadly disease, she would 
    still have been hurt. He is already known with a woman, who claimed 
    to be pregnant for him and he is also a wife beater.
You need to clearly define your relationship. If you’re friendly 
    with someone and you start to notice a change in his attitude, 
    don’t just assume he wants a relationship. Desire is different from 
    love.
Back to Esther, please do write in and encourage this young 
    girl. She needs all the support she can get.
