Getting the practice group to work
If trying to get other partners involved in implementing the 
    practice group does not work, then a personal appeal to having them 
    not become overly critical during the transition period may at 
    least neutralize their disruptive capabilities.
Ask them to suggest ways in which to keep the initiative on a 
    positive and constructive course, recognising that sometimes as 
    professionals, they are extremely analytical and critical of every 
    new endeavour.
Keep in mind that your most powerful management tool, as a 
    managing or principal partner, is attention. Whatever it is that 
    you devote attention to, invest time in, are seen to be giving 
    priority, is therefore deemed by all of those who look to you for 
    guidance, as important!
Therefore, the next thing you must do is to review your calendar 
    and determine how many of those practice group meetings you can 
    drop in on over the next month.
Your presence will signify both to the practice leader and, more 
    importantly, to the team members, that this is something you are 
    seriously interested in.
By attending the entire meeting you will gain some first-hand 
    experience at observing how the group reacts and what significant 
    issue are unearthed. Some firms encourage their practice groups to 
    have regular meetings while others make it mandatory that groups 
    meet at least monthly.
Whichever is your firm’s policy preference, there is no 
    substitute for the enthusiasm that can result from having the 
    managing partner or some member of the executive committee show 
    interest in the group’s activities by volunteering to attend one of 
    their meetings as an outside observer.
This can be an excellent means of both observing the group’s 
    progress as well as contributing some substantive ideas. Among 
    those firms that are progressing well with practice group, it was 
    observed that the executive committee divided all of the firm’s 
    various groups among themselves so as not to impose any onerous 
    time commitments on any one member.
It then suggested to practice leaders (one-on-one) that when 
    they schedule their next meeting, they would welcome sitting-in as 
    an observer.
Be an enthusiastic cheerleader. This is your second most 
    powerful tool. Talk to other practice leaders about what you 
    observed from sitting in on some practice group meeting.
That will both serve to support the view that this is important 
    to you and that they are likely to see you in attendance at their 
    meeting; as well as signal to any practice leaders who are not 
    meeting that your commitment to moving forward is genuine.
Shoot an e-mail to the specific leader and the members of the 
    group acknowledging some of the good action ideas that were 
    generated and how you are looking forward to hearing about the 
    progress that has been made at their next meeting. That will 
    provide the additional catalyst to drive team members to progress 
    those activities they volunteered to implement.
You may also develop a Practice Group Leaders Council. 
    Increasingly, firms have come to realize that one of the challenges 
    is to find the means by which to facilitate communications, 
    information and knowledge, among and between the departments, 
    practice groups, and industry teams that comprise firms.
Many firms have now initiated some form of practice leaders 
    council that meets for a couple of hours (at least quarterly) to 
    review and discuss what is going on within their various groups. 
    This council can serve as an excellent venue for reporting results 
    that can then be communicated across the firm.
At your meetings with these practice leaders, acknowledge small 
    success (especially any that you can quantify), encourage any 
    leaders who have been reluctant to take action, and spend some time 
    discussing issues that are germane to other practice groups (where 
    some course of action underway in one group may have implications 
    for other groups).
Schedule periodic progress reviews every six months, with all 
    practice leaders to discuss their progress, get specific feedback 
    on action plans, and offer suggestions to enhance performance. By 
    setting the date for this review meeting well in advance, this 
    action signals to leaders the importance attached to their being 
    able to report specific results.
