Controlling body odour
You step out of your place in the queue at your bank. You had 
    thought you would put up with it but your resistance breaks down. 
    The woman in front of you and the man behind you have something in 
    common. They have not been kind to their own arm pits.
You had planned for a two-hour stretch in the library and you 
    were tucked into your books. Suddenly, there is bad odour. You look 
    under the table and the handsome guy across from you had slipped 
    off his shoes. Bye to library. Your colleague is enthusiastically 
    explaining the circulated memo to you at close range and you shut 
    her up – quickly! You are nagging your driver in spite of his 
    petting you with "Mummy", "Madam" and a 
    thousand "Ma". The truth is you hate being sealed up in 
    your car air conditioning with his body odour. In the quiet of your 
    sitting room, you initiated an impromptu dance with your 
    girlfriend. You cut it off sooner than expected because her hair 
    was not fresh.
Body odour (B.O.) is unpleasant smell from the 
    body. It is irritating and repulsive and it can make people 
    spiteful towards the bearer. It is caused by excretions and 
    bacterial action on secreted body fluids and it is especially a 
    problem in tropical areas where bacterial action can be rapid. 
    Refinement is not a privilege of rich and educated people. It does 
    require some effort but it is not necessarily expensive. Everybody 
    – from cleaner and market woman to university professor and 
    business magnate, young and old, illiterate and educated, rich and 
    poor – can enjoy personal refinement without much cost.
Refinement helps us to have good relationships with others. When 
    we lack refinement, it can bring out the worst in people (though a 
    virtuous person would show tolerance and kindness towards everyone 
    in spite of people’s lack of refinement).
Within the family, starting from husband and wife, romance 
    disappears, fun diminishes and tempers set in when partners cannot 
    enjoy each other’s company and closeness. The family’s physical and 
    mental health can be affected by lack of care in controlling 
    odours. We need to take care of our bodies as well as our 
    environments. In Nigeria, lack of water and lack of electricity can 
    compound our efforts.
The body areas of concern are the scalp (for black women), the 
    mouth, the arm pits, the genital areas, and the feet. These areas 
    typically harbour moisture from sweat and small but mighty microbes 
    that thrive in such moisture. The microbes include bacteria and 
    fungi and we need to learn how to not give them a chance. Personal 
    habits, cleanliness of our environment including the air, and using 
    medical remedies are all important for controlling body odour.
Habits include regular "cures" such as manicure and 
    pedicure, teeth flossing, hair dressing and daily grooming. 
    Generally, prevention is better than cure. Dirt should be removed 
    not covered up. Spraying perfume to cover smell is not hygienic. 
    The effort should be to keep bacterial and fungal action under 
    control. Washing oneself well and then enhancing freshness with 
    perfume makes us pleasant. Too much perfume can distract or disturb 
    others. In the tropics, bathing twice daily is common habit. 
    Changing clothes, especially undergarments after each use instead 
    of repeating them before washing is important.
Black women with permed hair sometimes insist of keeping a style 
    till it wears out. This may be too many days during which sweat and 
    bacterial and fungal action can accumulate odour. Women therefore 
    need to have alternative ways of presenting their hair: styling, 
    washing and packing, as well as effectively using head-ties, 
    attachments, and wigs alternatively with hair styling. Thus they 
    can maintain beauty without compromising hygiene.
Teeth may be brushed several times a day with freshening paste: 
    early in the morning to regain freshness, after major meals to 
    limit plaque build-up, and before going to bed to minimize 
    bacterial action during sleep. The tongue accumulates layers of 
    food debris and should be brushed also. The back of the tongue is a 
    hideout for microbes and should be reached by the brush. Occasional 
    gargling with 1:.10 dilution of 3 per cent hydrogen peroxide 
    (sold in pharmacies) also keeps the stubborn bacterial flora of 
    this region low. Hydrogen peroxide is for external use and should 
    not be swallowed. If accidentally swallowed drink excess water and 
    see your doctor. The between-teeth areas are also bacterial havens 
    and can be reached with tooth picks and dental floss regularly. 
    Bacteria hide well in between the molar teeth which may receive 
    less attention than the front teeth during brushing. Care should be 
    taken to brush the molar teeth well. During the day, drinking small 
    amounts of water every couple of hours helps to flow off bacteria 
    which will pass into the stomach and be destroyed by stomach acid. 
    Mouth odor that accumulates during silent work may thus be reduced. 
    Talking every now and then rather than keeping the mouth shut for 
    hours and singing occasionally helps to vent the lungs, throat, and 
    mouth, clearing odour.
Bacteria love the warm and moist areas of the arm pits. Keeping 
    the hair cleared or low is helpful. Washing with soap may not be 
    adequate. These areas may need regular gentle scrubbing with raffia 
    or other type of sponge to remove dead skin and bacteria around the 
    hair follicles. After bathing, if the armpits are rubbed with a few 
    drops of 50-70 per cent alcohol (sold in pharmacies) or 
    "spirit" they can remain fresh for most of the day, even 
    with heavy sweating. Sweat alone is usually odorless. It is 
    bacterial action that fouls it. Alcohol kills the bacteria and 
    therefore your sweat stays odorless without enough bacteria to foul 
    it.
Bacteria also love the warm and moist genital areas. These areas 
    are too sensitive to alcohol. The feminine clefts should be 
    accessed during bathing and washed with soap. Scrubbing of the 
    female delicate skin can lead to damage. Scrubbing is helpful in 
    removing dead skin and cleaving bacteria from the anal and scrotal 
    regions. A little disinfectant in bathing water is helpful for 
    antibacterial protection of the genital areas. For most parts of 
    the body keeping bacteria low also keeps fungi off as fungi are 
    often opportunists, capitalizing on areas where bacteria have 
    invaded and lowered the body’s barriers.
Underwear should be changed as needed and in the tropics, cotton 
    material (rather than synthetics) is useful good body ventilation 
    and for easily soaking up sweat and allowing it to be 
    
    evaporated.Underwear should not be repeated before washing. 
    These habits limit our vulnerability to genital disease-causing 
    organisms that can be picked up in public facilities. Even the air 
    in these areas can be loaded with microbial pores. There is no real 
    danger if we have hygienic habits because these microbes won’t have 
    a chance to thrive on our bodies
The feet need daily scrubbing. The nails need occasional 
    pedicure to remove dirt, bacteria, and fungus under the nails and 
    around the nails. Occasionally (once a month) the feet should be 
    soaked in water with added disinfectant for 10-30 minutes. This 
    soaking kills bacteria hiding in areas not reached by daily 
    scrubbing. It also softens callous skin and this can be removed by 
    gentle scraping. If this is not done, the microbes react with sweat 
    and dead skin and create a pungent odour. Shoes should be aired 
    when taken off. The inside of shoes should be cleaned regularly 
    with a damp soapy cloth and followed by disinfectant. Avoid 
    transferring dirt and bacteria from the exterior to the interior of 
    shoes when the shoes are cleaned. Different cleaning cloths should 
    be used for the outside and the inside. Shoes can also be 
    conditioned by placing them under the hot sun after cleaning. Avoid 
    wearing closed shoes all the time in the tropics. Alternate covered 
    shoes with ventilated footwear.
Finally, the home environment if not well cleaned and 
    disinfected, can harbour bacteria, fungi, and other micro-beings 
    which cover the surfaces we touch, and their spores which fill the 
    air that we breathe.
These means for good health are accessible to all because they 
    are easy and inexpensive. They are helpful for people with mild 
    B.O. as well as those with strong B.O. 
    cased by genetic or medical 
    problems. Within the family, members can help each other out, doing 
    each other’s manicure and pedicure, shaving, hair styling, washing, 
    etc. These health habits unite spouses and siblings and enhance 
    affections and produce improved relationships. The result is better 
    physical and mental well being for all members of the family.
