Makeup tips for Older Woman
Make up for older women should 
    serve two purposes. First it should add colour to faded skin. 
    Second it should conceal minor flaws and wrinkles as much as 
    possible. Having said this, it’s important to understand that 
    make up for older women is not 
    intended to layer the face in foundations and colours that attempt 
    to make ladies look younger.
They are intended to bring out the natural mature beauty, which 
    can make a woman look younger more as a by-product than as a goal. 
    Women with mature skin are as beautiful as the dewy youth – just in 
    a different way. Below, I have compiled tips for on makeup for 
    older women.
•To start, the foundation for mature skin should be close to 
    medium-weight. Mature skin has wrinkles and a heavy foundation can 
    actually make the wrinkles look deeper. If you have mature skin, 
    you should always err on the lighter or sheerer side of 
    foundations. A sheer or medium-weight foundation will reflect light 
    and cover up many blemishes. An oil-based foundation should be 
    applied on top of a daytime moisturizer designed for mature 
    skin.
•A rule of thumb for applying make up for older women is to not 
    use too much. When make-up is too heavy, and doesn’t blend into 
    your skin tone or highlight your best features, it can actually 
    make you look older. We’ve all seen women who obviously think more 
    make up is better, but that’s a 
    fallacy when it comes to mature skin. Also, your eye shadow and 
    brow colours should blend with your skin tone. The eye shadows used 
    should be cream based, because they will moisturize while hiding 
    flaws. The appearance of dark bags under the eyes can be minimized 
    with a concealer which is one shade lighter than your 
    foundation.
•Another tip for applying make 
    up for older women includes using a very small amount of 
    blush on the cheeks that creates a glowing, rather than a clownish, 
    look. Also, make up for older 
    women should include lipstick with moisturizer in the formula. 
    Older women’s lips will dry out and need frequent moisturizing.
Careful selection and application of 
    make up for older women can enhance any mature women’s 
    beauty. Soft application and colour designed to highlight natural 
    beauty, while downplaying signs of aging, usually results in 
    melting the years away.
