Practical love in the home (III)
Dear Reader,
Last week, I taught on some practical ways wives can express 
    their love to their husbands. We saw how God’s love is 
    unconditional and expressive. We learnt how we are to love our 
    spouse and our family members, not because of what they do or do 
    not do, but in spite of their shortcomings. We also saw via God’s 
    Word that loving your husband or wife is a commandment, which is 
    not optional and that love is not love until it is expressed.
This week, I shall be showing you other practical ways you can 
    demonstrate your love in the home. Love can be expressed in 
    thoughts, words and action.
Loving in thoughts
Loving, essentially, starts from the heart and eventually finds 
    expression through the mouth and by actions. Husbands must learn, 
    beginning from the thoughts of their hearts, to love their wives. 
    Out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks (Matthew 
    12:.34). When your heart is full of loving thoughts, it 
    readily finds expression in the words you speak. If a man, for 
    instance, uses abusive words on his wife, he is speaking out of the 
    abundance of his heart. Until he changes the contents of his 
    thoughts, he cannot speak otherwise.
Men initiate things and women respond to them. Husband, initiate 
    the love relationship between you and your wife and she will 
    respond to you in love. No woman hates to be loved. When you love 
    your wife, you easily win her submission.
Loving in words
"I love you" – three short words, yet, by them, men 
    and women come together to establish God’s counsel on the earth. 
    Often, however, these words are forgotten after the euphoria of the 
    wedding ceremony is over. Words are powerful, and saying, "I 
    love you" over and over again, spices up the marriage. Just 
    like it is necessary for rain to fall again and again, for farmers 
    to reap a bountiful harvest, so also it is to say, "I love 
    you" over and over again.
The relationship started by the use of these three words, should 
    grow also by its continuous use. The presumptuous claim that it is 
    not necessary to say it over and over again because, "She 
    should know I love her", is wrong. The Bible points out the 
    importance of voicing out what one believes in the heart (Romans 
    10:.10). Give voice to your feelings; it is not foolishness! 
    The world was made by faith-filled words. Let your "I love 
    you" to your spouse be full of faith. Even if your spouse is a 
    monster, she would change to a marvel! That is how God won man to 
    Himself – while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us, thus 
    saying, " I love you", to the people who rejected His 
    love.
A husband and wife must learn to speak kind words to each other. 
    Words create the right atmosphere in the home. Express to your 
    mate, the nice qualities you like in him or her. Husband, handle 
    your wife with care, by speaking kind words of appreciation to her 
    often. She needs to hear you express daily, how much you love and 
    appreciate her. My husband says it to me daily and I never get 
    tired of hearing him.
Wife, don’t nag your husband to death, by repeatedly pointing 
    out his shortcomings or problems in your home. Where there is a 
    need for correction, use the sandwich method - compliment, correct 
    and then compliment. Keep the fire of love in your marriage 
    burning. Love is medicine. God is love. Let God reign in your home 
    and every mountain standing in the way of peace, progress stability 
    and success in your home, will give way in Jesus’ name. Amen.
Next week, I shall examine loving by action. Meanwhile, if you 
    have not accepted the Lord Jesus Christ as your Lord and Saviour, 
    you are incapable of demonstrating God’s kind of love. It is when 
    you accept Jesus into your life that the love of God is shed abroad 
    into your heart (Romans 5:.5). This is what being saved is 
    all about. Are you saved? You get saved by confessing your sins and 
    accepting Jesus as your Saviour and Lord. If you are ready to be 
    saved, please say this prayer: Dear Lord, I come 
    to You today. I am a sinner. Forgive me my sins. Cleanse me with 
    Your precious Blood. I accept You as my Lord and Saviour. Now I 
    know I am born again!
