How to be a good dad to your children
COMMENTS by some children about their father are disheartening. 
    You will hear them talk about the head of the home as someone who 
    hasn’t been there for them. A father who is never around; a good 
    man to everyone but his own. To some children, daddy is the 
    greatest. He buys whatever they ask for, and pampers them with 
    gifts. He saves them from mummy’s spanking. That daddy will always 
    be on my side is the confidence some children have.
I counseled a lady recently who was concerned about her 
    children’s behaviour. They seem to be going wild by the day, and 
    she’s loosing control over them; thanks to their dad. She said he 
    would not allow her discipline them. If she did that when he was 
    not at home, the children would report her to him when she came 
    back home and all hell would be let loose. She had tried to talk 
    him into seeing the negative effect of his actions to no avail. So, 
    to the children, dad is the greatest while mummy is a bully.
There is a need to redefine the word ‘good’ if we will be effective 
    fathers. The word ‘good’ isn’t synonymous to 
    letting your children have their way. It’s not when your children 
    call you good that you are one, but when deep in your heart, you 
    know that you have trained them to be better people for their own 
    sake and to live a purposeful life. Being a good dad is not about 
    what you do but who you are. So, if we fathers learn to work on 
    ourselves, we can effectively reach our children even though at 
    present, they may not like some of the instructions and reprimands 
    we give them (just as in the days of our parents when we felt that 
    they were too harsh on us).
To be a good dad, we must learn to control our emotions, one of 
    which is anger. Our children will sometimes provoke us, but 
    throwing a feat or a punch at our children won’t help them grow up 
    as emotionally stable individuals. Screaming at them isn’t an 
    effective medium of communication either. Have you observed that 
    when you tell your children to do things out of anger, they often 
    turn up not doing it well. Their minds seem to shut down when they 
    are screamed at. The old time religion of being smacked for every 
    wrong done is also not too effective when it’s done out of anger 
    instead of love. One other emotion that must be put in check is 
    love that doesn’t give room for correction. You should never love 
    your children to the point they would become no good; you should 
    give room for them to be corrected.
To be a good dad, we must let their mum have her way. In the 
    days of our fathers, it was common to find daddies reprimanding 
    mummies in the presence of the children. Sometimes, it’s because 
    mummy ‘over-reacted’ in the way she 
    acted to them when they did wrong. In such a family where this is 
    common, you will always find the pampered children eventually 
    becoming a nuisance to the parents (both daddy and mummy).
I am of the opinion that when it comes to raising our children, 
    we must learn to respect their mothers’ opinions. I heard my wife 
    say to my son once, ‘don’t touch that juice yet, it’s too early to 
    put it in your belly’. A few minutes later, he walked to the bed 
    with his lovely eyes begging for daddy to over turn mummy’s word. I 
    was tempted, but I said NO. If you feel that their mum is too hard 
    on them, then call her later when the children are not there to 
    express your feeling.
If we will be good fathers, we must learn to express ourselves 
    to our children not just by actions but by affirmative words. Many 
    of our fathers are old skool. 
    Many daddies would never say to their children I am proud of you or 
    I love you or sorry, etc. I appreciate what Gerald Anthony wrote on 
    the topic, ‘How to be a good father’, 
    when he said: "It’s a sort of a cliché that fathers are 
    proud of their children... but a lot of fathers don’t realize how 
    important it is to actually tell their kids, not just their friends 
    and co-workers! Your kids need to know that you’re proud of them 
    for ... and the things that they do that you show them you’re proud 
    of are the things they will try to do again. If you show them that 
    you are proud of their good grades, they will try to get good 
    grades ... if you show them that you are proud of them being a good 
    person, or good with their siblings, or something else, they will 
    do whatever it is that made you proud again (or at least 
    try)."
To be a good dad, we must value self-improvement. When I speak 
    in relationship meetings, I categorically say that mega few men 
    read books on relationship. When you see men with books, over 80 
    per cent of the time, it’s a book on finance - how to make more 
    money. I believe that the worst way to learn a thing is through 
    experience. Truly, we don’t know things by default, we are created 
    to learn to know. There is a need for every dad to pick a book on 
    how to properly raise their children, read it and act on the 
    instructions given.
