INTERFERENCE BETWEEN SYSTEMS DUE TO HYDROMETEOR SCATTERING ON
SATELLITE DOWNLINK SIGNALS IN TROPICAL REGIONS
INTRODUCTION
The utilization of communication satellites for providing new
telecommunication services and enhancing existing ones continues to
garner international support and patronage.
Integrated services digital networks (ISDN) connections via
satellite for telephony and data communication, internet services
relying on very small aperture terminal (VSAT) systems, satellite
television, remote sensing of the environment, and others are typical
services that rely on satellite communication for dependable and
efficient service delivery. In Sub-Saharan Africa, these services
are still developing and, if well managed, have the potential to
help the region keep pace with the modern information age.
Many communication satellites in use operate at
frequencies that are also used for terrestrial telecommunication
services such as terrestrial telephony and television broadcast.
This situation has created significant pressure on available
bandwidth, resulting in bandwidth congestion at lower frequencies.
Shifting to higher frequencies equal to or greater than 10 GHz to
acquire additional bandwidth has come at a cost to the quality of
the desired satellite channel. As the frequency increases, signal
degradation due to interaction with hydrometeors also intensifies.
Hydrometeor-induced signal attenuation and scattering, signal
depolarization, and intersystem interference can become pronounced
at frequencies above 10 GHz. For instance, rain scattering is
severe at these frequencies due to the raindrop size being
comparable to the signal wavelength.
Additionally, atmospheric gases, namely, dry air (oxygen) and water
vapor, exhibit significant specific attenuation in the frequency
range of 22.2-30 GHz (ITU-R, P. 676-5, 2003).
When the common volume formed by the intersection of terrestrial
and satellite signals lies within the bright band (melting
layer), reflectivity decreases at a rate of 6.5 dB/km in this region,
leading to strong ice scattering and attenuation of the
satellite channel. A weak satellite signal at the receiving end
is vulnerable to severe interference from a robust terrestrial
system operating in its vicinity at the same frequency if
their beam centers intersect and contain precipitating particles.
Various interference geometries are possible.
This paper focuses on a scenario where a satellite downlink