intersystem interference for accurate determination of interference
levels to aid in better planning and design of
microwave communication systems in these regions.
The present study examines hydrometeor scattering in
additional locations within the
equatorial region of Africa: Douala, Cameroon (9.70°E, 4.05°N), and Nairobi, Kenya (36.75°E, 1.30°S). The study subsequently calculates
interference in these locations in terms of effective
transmission loss and compares the results with those obtained in Ile-Ife,
Nigeria (4.34°E, 7.33°N).
THEORETICAL CONSIDERATIONS AND INPUT PARAMETERS
The effective transmission loss is defined as the transmission
loss minus the additional attenuation experienced by the desired signal
(Capsoni and D’Amico, 1997). It is typically evaluated based on a joint
and conditioned statistics of the transmission loss and
the extra attenuation. It is expressed as:
Where L is the transmission loss defined as the
ratio of the interfering transmitted power
Pt to the interfering
received power Pr at the
interfered station, evaluated using the Bistatic Radar
Equation (BRE). Aw represents the extra attenuation
on the desired signal. Utilizing the simplified form of the BRE (Capsoni
et al., 1992), the transmission loss is
expressed as:
and the term CV denotes the common volume formed by the
interfering beams, evaluated from the following integral:
In equations (2.3) and (2.4) and Figure
1, At
(R1) and
Ar
(R2) indicate the attenuations
along paths R1 from
the transmitter to the common volume, and
R2 from the common volume
to the satellite receiver.
Ag represents the attenuation due
to gaseous absorption. Gt
and Gr are the
transmitter and receiver antenna gains, and λ is the wavelength of
the radio signal. The quantities
Ft
(ύ1,
Ǿ1) and
Fr
(ύ2,
Ǿ2) represent the
directivity function of the transmitting and receiving antenna
systems, calculated in terms of their effective area.
σbi is the bistatic
scattering cross section defined as the scattering cross
section per unit volume of precipitation. It is related to the
radar reflectivity factor Z and the point rain
rate R as Z = 10log
z , where z =
aRb . In this study,