Cervical cancer is preventable and treatable if detected early. Vaccination with an HPV vaccine is credited with reducing both the incidence and death rate from cervical cancer. Gardasil, a prophylactic quadrivalent vaccine manufactured by Merck & Co. and licensed in many countries, is designed to protect against HPV 16 and 18 and also protects against low-risk genotypes 6 and 11. Administration of three doses at intervals of 2 months between doses 1 and 2; 6 months between doses 1 and 3 in females and males aged 9–15 years with Merck’s HPV vaccine will reduce the incidence of low-grade and high-grade lesions, infection with vaccine HPV types, long-term duration of protection, and robust anti-HPV responses when administered with other common vaccines. Thereby, reducing the physical, emotional, and financial burden of managing HPV disease. GSK’s Cervarix is a bivalent vaccine with only HPV 16 and 18.
Secondary prevention is done through screening and treatment of identified pre-cancerous lesions. Screening methods include Pap Smear, Visual Inspection with Acetic Acid, Visual Inspection with Lugol’s Iodine, HPV DNA Testing, Hybrid Capture® 2 Test (HC-2), and The Fast HPV test. Pap smear screening in developed countries has contributed to an 80% reduction in the incidence of cervical cancer. Hysterectomy, Chemotherapy, and Radiotherapy are mostly used as tertiary interventions.
According to the World Health Organization, preliminary data show that HPV vaccination may be cost-effective in developing countries. Currently, in Uganda, the Programme for Appropriate Technology in Health (PATH) in close collaboration with the local Ministry of Health and other partners is piloting HPV vaccine introduction. The piloting has also been carried out in India, Vietnam, and Peru. The governments of developing countries, including Nigeria, need cancer policies and to step up media enlightenment in the fight against cervical cancer, which is not only a health concern but also a social, economic, and psychological burden. Operation Stop Cervical Cancer Nigeria (SCCAN) and other relevant organizations should join hands in preventing cervical cancer in Nigerian women.