Whatever Happened to Traditional Family Structure!
The need to restore the African traditional family structure to allow it to regain its traditional status and power of effecting positive change in society was part of the discussion at a recent family congress held in Abuja, as reported by Mary Ekah.
“The task of raising a child properly was a sacred one because of its far-reaching consequences for the security and survival of the soul of the community. Fathers, mothers, grandparents, older siblings, in-laws, and relatives had a collective responsibility to raise the young, and each saw this as an obligation to the family and the larger community. To fail to raise a morally responsible person was to have failed the community and brought disgrace to one’s family and kindred…”
This was the submission of the National Coordinator of the Marriage and Family Life Committee of the Catholic Bishops Conference and Director of the Lagos Resource Centre, Mrs. Bridget Itsueli, at the World Congress Families held in Abuja recently. This was said in recognition of the contribution of the African traditional family to the development of good citizens and the establishment of the community’s identity, outlook, values, and goals.
Itsueli mentioned that traditional societies recognize the political and social significance of the family, noting, however, that modern Nigerian society seems quite ignorant of this truth. “It is true that the larger community is always a sum total and a reflection of its individual families. We cannot continue to ignore the current lack of moral values, which is glaringly evident in our leadership at all levels of Nigerian society,” she said.
She noted that this was a reflection of what is pervasive at the family level where there is serious moral disintegration, which needs to be addressed on a national agenda. “In a nation where the majority of its families live in abject poverty and deprivation of all sorts, where basic amenities like education and health are handled with nonchalance and a gross lack of probity, parents and families in such a nation cannot but be demoralized, incapacitated, and weak,” Itsueli said.