Teeth should be brushed several times a day with freshening paste: early in the morning to regain freshness, after major meals to limit plaque build-up, and before going to bed to minimize bacterial action during sleep. The tongue accumulates layers of food debris and should be brushed also. The back of the tongue is a hideout for microbes and should be reached by the brush. Occasional gargling with a 1:10 dilution of 3 percent hydrogen peroxide (sold in pharmacies) also keeps the stubborn bacterial flora of this region low. Hydrogen peroxide is for external use and should not be swallowed. If accidentally swallowed, drink excess water and consult your doctor. The areas between teeth are also bacterial havens and can be reached with toothpicks and dental floss regularly. Bacteria hide well between the molar teeth, which may receive less attention than the front teeth during brushing. Care should be taken to brush the molar teeth well. During the day, drinking small amounts of water every couple of hours helps to wash away bacteria, which will pass into the stomach and be destroyed by stomach acid. Mouth odor that accumulates during silent work may thus be reduced. Talking every now and then rather than keeping the mouth shut for hours and singing occasionally helps to vent the lungs, throat, and mouth, clearing odors.
Bacteria love the warm and moist areas of the armpits. Keeping the hair cleared or low is helpful. Washing with soap may not be adequate. These areas may need regular gentle scrubbing with raffia or another type of sponge to remove dead skin and bacteria around the hair follicles. After bathing, if the armpits are rubbed with a few drops of 50-70 percent alcohol (sold in pharmacies) or "spirit," they can remain fresh for most of the day, even with heavy sweating. Sweat alone is usually odorless. It is bacterial action that causes the foul odor. Alcohol kills the bacteria, and therefore your sweat stays odorless without enough bacteria to cause a foul smell.