The group advocates for behavior change at the grassroots level. It is essential for young people to be engaged in developmental programs continuously to equip them to face the challenges of adolescence and adulthood. These programs consist of a structured series of activities and experiences that help youths acquire social, emotional, ethical, physical, and cognitive competencies. These programs are also knowledge-based, focusing on developing a variety of life skills and engaging youth in sports, clubs, community service, and connecting them with adult and peer mentors.

The residents of Isele Community in Ikorodu, Lagos State, both young and old, had the opportunity to participate in such developmental programs for a year. A final Open Community Meeting was recently held in the community to wrap up the initiative.

The project was titled the "Final Open Community Meeting in Isele Community," also known as the CHIPAC project. During the meeting, the Executive Director of the project, Mr. Henry Adenigba from HFPD, discussed the highlights of the one-year project. The training was focused on Peer Education Plus Project for five target groups: Male Out of School Youth (MOSY), Female Out of School Youth (FOSY), Transport Workers (TWs), Female Sex Workers (FSW), and Uniformed Service Men (USM).

The project primarily aimed at promoting behavioral change regarding health issues, vocational skills, youth development, capacity building, among others. The program commenced in the community after receiving approval from the Community Development Associations (CDAs).

During the experience-sharing session, participants from each target group had the chance to express what they had learned over the past year. A member of the MOSY group mentioned, "There are some information which I now know about HIV and AIDS, I’m now better informed." A member of the FOSY group shared, "I now know the effects of drug/alcohol abuse and how one can live positively if a person is positive. As a youth, abstinence is the key," he emphasized.

A Transport Worker advised his peers to remain faithful to their partners and emphasized the importance of condom use if fidelity is a challenge. Another participant, Ms. Precious Ifeoma, expressed, "The program has enlightened me on how best to manage my money."

Even though the program concluded with a final open community meeting, as stated by the Executive Director of Administration/Finance, Mrs. Adeyeye, the project's impact will continue. She mentioned, "After we leave, they (the community) will continue with the program, and we will only come to mentor them and follow up. It is a behavioral change community project," she affirmed.

To ensure the sustainability of the project within the community, a Community-Based Organization comprising all the target groups was established during the event. Mrs. Adeyeye further added, "Any activity they carry out, they’ll inform us, and our sponsor will be informed accordingly."

The event also featured drama presentations on HIV and AIDS and the presentation of awards to prominent leaders in the community who contributed to the project's success. The project was sponsored by USAID, facilitated by the Society for Family Health (SFH) in Lagos State, and executed by the Humanity Foundation for Peace and Development.