Controlling Body Odor

You step out of your place in the queue at your bank. You had thought you would put up with it, but your resistance breaks down. The woman in front of you and the man behind you have something in common. They have not been kind to their own armpits.

You had planned for a two-hour stretch in the library, and you were tucked into your books. Suddenly, there is a bad odor. You look under the table, and the handsome guy across from you had slipped off his shoes. Goodbye to the library. Your colleague is enthusiastically explaining the circulated memo to you at close range, and you shut her up quickly! You are nagging your driver despite his petting you with "Mummy," "Madam," and a thousand "Ma." The truth is you hate being sealed up in your car's air conditioning with his body odor. In the quiet of your sitting room, you initiated an impromptu dance with your girlfriend. You cut it off sooner than expected because her hair was not fresh.

Body odor (B.O.) is an unpleasant smell from the body. It is irritating, repulsive, and can make people spiteful towards the bearer. It is caused by secreted body fluids and bacterial action, especially problematic in tropical areas where bacterial action can be rapid. Refinement is not a privilege of the rich and educated. It does require some effort but is not necessarily expensive. Everyone - from cleaners and market women to university professors and business magnates, young and old, illiterate and educated, rich and poor - can enjoy personal refinement without much cost.

Refinement helps us to have good relationships with others. When we lack refinement, it can bring out the worst in people (though a virtuous person would show tolerance and kindness towards everyone despite their lack of refinement).

Within the family, starting from husband and wife, romance disappears, fun diminishes, and tempers set in when partners cannot enjoy each other’s company and closeness. The family’s physical and mental health can be affected by the lack of care in controlling odors. We need to take care of our bodies as well as our environments. In Nigeria, the lack of water and electricity can compound our efforts.

The body areas of concern are the scalp (for black women), the mouth, the armpits, the genital areas, and the feet. These areas typically harbor moisture from sweat and microbes that thrive in such conditions. The microbes include bacteria and fungi, and we need to learn how to prevent their growth. Personal habits, cleanliness of our environment including the air, and using medical remedies are all important for controlling body odor.

Habits include regular grooming practices such as manicures, pedicures, teeth flossing, and daily grooming. Generally, prevention is better than cure. Dirt should be removed, not covered up. Spraying perfume to mask smells is not hygienic. The effort should be to keep bacterial and fungal growth under control. Washing oneself well and then enhancing freshness with perfume makes us pleasant. Using too much perfume can be distracting or disturbing to others. In the tropics, bathing twice daily is a common habit. Changing clothes, especially undergarments, after each use instead of reusing them before washing is essential.

Black women with permed hair sometimes insist on keeping a style until it wears out. This may be too many days during which sweat and microbial activity can accumulate odors. Women, therefore, need to have alternative ways of presenting their hair: styling, washing, and packing, as well as effectively using head-ties, attachments, and wigs alternately with hair styling. Thus, they can maintain beauty without compromising hygiene.

Teeth should be brushed several times a day with freshening paste: early in the morning to regain freshness, after major meals to limit plaque build-up, and before going to bed to minimize bacterial action during sleep. The tongue accumulates layers of food debris and should be brushed also. The back of the tongue is a hideout for microbes and should be reached by the brush. Occasional gargling with a 1:10 dilution of 3 percent hydrogen peroxide (sold in pharmacies) also keeps the stubborn bacterial flora of this region low. Hydrogen peroxide is for external use and should not be swallowed. If accidentally swallowed, drink excess water and consult your doctor. The areas between teeth are also bacterial havens and can be reached with toothpicks and dental floss regularly. Bacteria hide well between the molar teeth, which may receive less attention than the front teeth during brushing. Care should be taken to brush the molar teeth well. During the day, drinking small amounts of water every couple of hours helps to wash away bacteria, which will pass into the stomach and be destroyed by stomach acid. Mouth odor that accumulates during silent work may thus be reduced. Talking every now and then rather than keeping the mouth shut for hours and singing occasionally helps to vent the lungs, throat, and mouth, clearing odors.

Bacteria love the warm and moist areas of the armpits. Keeping the hair cleared or low is helpful. Washing with soap may not be adequate. These areas may need regular gentle scrubbing with raffia or another type of sponge to remove dead skin and bacteria around the hair follicles. After bathing, if the armpits are rubbed with a few drops of 50-70 percent alcohol (sold in pharmacies) or "spirit," they can remain fresh for most of the day, even with heavy sweating. Sweat alone is usually odorless. It is bacterial action that causes the foul odor. Alcohol kills the bacteria, and therefore your sweat stays odorless without enough bacteria to cause a foul smell.

Bacteria also love the warm and moist genital areas. These areas are too sensitive for alcohol. The feminine areas should be cleaned during bathing and washed with soap. Scrubbing of the delicate skin can lead to damage. Scrubbing is helpful in removing dead skin and cleaving bacteria from the anal and scrotal regions. A little disinfectant in bathing water is helpful for antibacterial protection of the genital areas. For most parts of the body, keeping bacteria low also keeps fungi at bay as fungi are often opportunistic, capitalizing on areas where bacteria have invaded and lowered the body’s defenses.

Underwear should be changed as needed, and in the tropics, cotton material (rather than synthetics) is useful for good body ventilation and for easily soaking up sweat and allowing it to be evaporated. Underwear should not be reused before washing. These habits limit our vulnerability to genital disease-causing organisms that can be picked up in public facilities. Even the air in these areas can be loaded with microbial spores. There is no real danger if we have hygienic habits because these microbes won’t have a chance to thrive on our bodies.

The feet need daily scrubbing. The nails need occasional pedicures to remove dirt, bacteria, and fungus under and around the nails. Occasionally (once a month), the feet should be soaked in water with added disinfectant for 10-30 minutes. This soaking kills bacteria hiding in areas not reached by daily scrubbing. It also softens calloused skin, which can be removed by gentle scraping. If this is not done, the microbes react with sweat and dead skin, creating a pungent odor. Shoes should be aired out when taken off. The insides of shoes should be cleaned regularly with a damp soapy cloth and followed by a disinfectant. Avoid transferring dirt and bacteria from the exterior to the interior of shoes when cleaning them. Different cleaning cloths should be used for the outside and the inside. Shoes can also be conditioned by placing them under the hot sun after cleaning. Avoid wearing closed shoes all the time in the tropics. Alternate covered shoes with ventilated footwear.

Finally, the home environment, if not well cleaned and disinfected, can harbor bacteria, fungi, and other microorganisms that cover the surfaces we touch, and their spores fill the air that we breathe.

These means for good health are accessible to all because they are easy and inexpensive. They are helpful for people with mild body odor as well as those with strong body odor caused by genetic or medical issues. Within the family, members can help each other out by doing each other’s manicures and pedicures, shaving, hair styling, washing, etc. These health habits unite spouses and siblings, enhance affections, and improve relationships. The result is better physical and mental well-being for all members of the family.