Effect of heat processing on the proximate composition and energy values of selected Nigerian staple foods from oil-producing areas of the Niger Delta

Abstract
The proximate composition and energy values of four raw and heat-processed staple foods (yams, cassava, cocoyam, and maize) from oil-producing areas (Eleme, Ogoni, Okrika, and Nembe) of Rivers and Bayelsa States, and Abakaliki (a non-oil-producing area in Ebonyi State, Nigeria) as a control, were investigated. In raw yam tubers, moisture content was high in all locations and ranged from 61.96 ± 0.02% in Abakaliki to 63.77 ± 0.25% in Ogoni. Crude protein ranged from 1.39 ± 0.13% in Okrika to 1.71 ± 0.06% in Abakaliki, while ash content was highest (2.57 ± 0.12%) in Okrika, followed by 2.33 ± 0.01% in Eleme, and lowest (0.97 ± 0.06%) in Abakaliki. Crude fat was low in all locations, ranging from 0.10 ± 0.00% in Okrika to 0.17 ± 0.01% in Nembe, while total carbohydrate was high in all locations, ranging from 33.32 ± 0.42% in Ogoni to 35.21 ± 0.13% in Abakaliki. The calorific value (kcal/100 g sample) in all locations was low, with the highest (149.08) in yams from Abakaliki, followed by Eleme (142.55), and the lowest in Ogoni (140.09). Similar trends in values of the constituents were obtained in raw cassava, cocoyam, and maize from different oil-producing and control locations investigated. In each of these locations, heat processing generally increased the moisture content of all the samples (yam, cassava products, cocoyam, and maize), but decreased dry matter, crude protein, ash, crude fat, total carbohydrate, and calorific value. With the exception of moisture and ash, other nutrients were significantly higher in the control area of Abakaliki than the values obtained in similar samples from oil-producing areas of the Niger Delta investigated.

Introduction
In Nigeria, there are 36 states and the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja, divided into six geopolitical zones (Northeast, Northwest, Northcentral, Southeast, Southwest, and South South). Rivers and Bayelsa in the South South zone are two of the states in oil-producing areas of the Niger Delta, Nigeria, where staple foods such as yam, cassava, cocoyam, and maize are abundant, though the staples are seasonal. Oil-producing areas (Eleme, Ogoni, Okrika, and Nembe) are fraught with petroleum exploration and exploitation, leading to widespread pollution of farmlands (soils), rivers, and underground water with hydrocarbons and dispersant products. Crude oil spillages on soil and indiscriminate discharge of effluents on farmlands contaminate the soils and waterbed, making them polluted and unsuitable for agricultural purposes. Crude oil spillage exerts adverse effects on plants by making toxic minerals in the soil available to plants and by reducing the soil pH; when the soil pH drops below 4.50, the productivity of most crops is adversely affected. As the people of Rivers and Bayelsa States are predominantly subsistent farmers, the bulk of plant nutrients (carbohydrates, fats, proteins, ash, moisture, and fiber) in their diets are derived from the consumption of staple foods (starchy root tubers, cereals, and legumes).

Foods are necessary for humans for growth, development, reproduction, and energy. The poor nutritional status of Nigerians and malnutritional disorders are due to complex factors such as pollution, low productivity and quality, and the presence of toxicants in foods that need to be destroyed by heat treatment. For instance, heat treatment has been shown to inactivate trypsin inhibitors from the African yam bean. Yams are species of Dioscorea and belong to the Dioscoreaceae family propagated from tubers and grow best in deep, well-drained soils. They are peeled, boiled, and pounded to produce a gelatinous dough called pounded yam, which is consumed with soup. Yam flour, as a local soup thickener, is used to prepare afiaefere or white soup and is a good source of starch. Cassava (Manihot esculenta) is a root crop that belongs to the Euphorbiaceae family and is propagated from stem cuttings. The root is a cheap source of carbohydrates for humans and livestock. Fermented cassava roots are boiled and pounded into a thick paste called fufu, which is consumed with soup. The root can be cooked and eaten with red palm oil and sauces. The roots may be peeled, grated, fermented, and fried with or without red palm oil into garri flour, in which form it is mainly consumed in Nigeria. Taro cocoyam (Colocasia esculenta) and tannia species (Xanthosoma sagittifolium) are mostly available and consumed members of the Araceae family. Young leaves of taro cocoyam are eaten in Nigeria and other West African countries as vegetable food for ruminants, particularly sheep and goats. Cocoyam is a good source of carbohydrates and energy and is usually eaten boiled or roasted.