"War Child: A Novel" by Bruce Cerew
Upon witnessing the explosion, its creators had mixed reactions. However, one thing was certain: they had ushered in a new dimension to war and the equilibrium in our existence. "I am become Death, the destroyer of worlds," cried Robert Oppenheimer as he watched the mushroom cloud of radioactive vapor rise into the cloud, leaving only fragments of jade green radioactive glass in the soil and a horrendous weapon of war for mankind.

The history of mankind is a tale of endless episodes of violence, death, bloodshed, and misery, all in the name of war. In spite of these harsh realities, mankind continues to be plagued by this terror. Benjamin Franklin once said, "There never was a good war or a bad peace," yet sadly, we are forced to hear and see the frightening images of innocent men, women, and children who have been murdered, maimed, raped, tortured, and scarred by conflicts in their localities.

Driven by the will to survive, the victims are forced to flee their homes and seek refuge in the indignity of life as hopeless nomads and refugees. In the process, they attempt to cross paths strewn with perils, despair, and hopelessness; many perish, some fall prey to uncertainty, and many never have another shot at the better life they desperately seek. Yet the fortunate few that brave the hazardous circumstances end up in the chains of destitution, discrimination, and under the constant shadow of fears in cities of Western nations.

"War Child" by Bruce Cerew is a book that chronicles the tales of war as seen through the eyes of a boy, Ray, its protagonist and victim of the horrors of conflicts in Sierra Leone and Liberia. The book paints a true picture of the plight of refugees and the horrors they are so atrociously forced upon by lending credence to the voices of the maimed men, women, and children scarred and ravaged by war.

The 318-page "War Child" is written as a narrative and employs a simple diction to tell its story. It is a tale of humor and tragedy, courage and fear, hopelessness and anticipation, love and betrayal, hope, and triumph. "War Child" is set in Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Liberia, and the Netherlands.

The book begins with Ray’s struggles in life beginning from an early age in Eastern Nigeria. The young Ray was constantly abused by his father (a compulsive gambler and an alcoholic) who could not come to terms with the boy’s inadequacies. Ray was thus sent away to the village of Amata to live with his grandmother. There, Ray finds love, fear, and a mysterious character in whom he suddenly finds a friend and comforter.

Now grown, the boy Ray puts aside childhood traumas and insecurities, returning to the city in search of a livelihood. But his hallucinations reappeared, handing him the feeling of emptiness and his fears and delusions.

In search of greener pastures away from the hassles of life in Nigeria, Ray emigrates to Monrovia. But before he could settle in, the country was thrown into conflict. The war ushered in a time of bloodshed, death, sorrow, and anguish. Ray was forced to flee to Freetown, Sierra Leone, in the hope for a life away from the misery of carnage in Liberia. But yet again, the gates of Hell were cast open.

The second part of "War Child" begins Ray’s eventual flight to the Netherlands, where Ray meets Jamo and Bar. The plot in the tale of their freedom from war, poverty, and uncertainty in Africa climaxes with the rejection, misgivings, and hardships of life in the observation camp. Living with other refugees, the trio are challenged by myriad elements and the harsh realities of life in the West.