Glo Self-care IVR Now Available in Local Languages

Globacom's new self-care service, which allows subscribers to access information about the network's services via telephone, is now accessible in local languages. A statement by the company's Director of Customer Care, Ms. Maria Svensson, announced that the service is now available in Hausa, Igbo, and Yoruba languages.

The Interactive Voice Response (IVR) service, the first of its kind in the market, enables subscribers to learn about the company and its activities without visiting the website or contacting the Glo Call Centre at 121 or 200 to speak with a customer care representative.

Through this service, customers can dial in and listen to basic static information about Glo products and services, including its various value-added services, promotional offers, SIM replacement, and special numbers, among other things.

"Our customers can now enjoy the service in English and Nigerian languages by dialing 500 or 5001 for English, 5002 for Yoruba, 5003 for Hausa, and 5004 for Igbo," Ms. Svensson stated.

She clarified that introducing the service in local languages was to provide those who are not comfortable with English the opportunity to benefit from it as well.

"When we launched the service a month ago, we promised to enhance it with additional features. The local language option is one of these features. We have fulfilled our promise by introducing this just a few weeks after its launch. We also plan to add other features such as Account Balance inquiry," she added.

Ms. Svensson reiterated that the Glo IVR service reduces waiting time on the Call Centre lines and offers an alternative for people who cannot access the website due to a lack of internet connectivity. The service is provided free of charge.

Globacom's Customer Care Department is on par with the best globally. It is equipped with cutting-edge technology and staffed by well-trained and highly motivated personnel.

The department is currently undergoing expansion and upon completion of the project, will be the largest customer care center in Africa.