How to be a good father to your children

Comments by some children about their father are disheartening. You will hear them talk about the head of the home as someone who hasn’t been there for them. A father who is never around; a good man to everyone but his own. To some children, daddy is the greatest. He buys whatever they ask for, and pampers them with gifts. He saves them from mummy’s punishment. That daddy will always be on my side is the confidence some children have.

I counseled a lady recently who was concerned about her children’s behavior. They seem to be acting out more each day, and she’s losing control over them; thanks to their dad. She said he would not allow her to discipline them. If she did so when he was not at home, the children would report her to him when she came back home and chaos would ensue. She had tried to talk to him about the negative effect of his actions to no avail. So, to the children, dad is the greatest while mum is seen as strict.

There is a need to redefine the word ‘good’ if we are to be effective fathers. The word ‘good’ isn’t synonymous with letting your children have their way. It’s not when your children call you good that you are one, but when deep in your heart, you know that you have raised them to be better individuals for their own sake and to live a purposeful life. Being a good father is not about what you do but who you are. So, if we fathers learn to work on ourselves, we can effectively reach our children even though at present, they may not appreciate some of the instructions and reprimands we give them (just as in the days of our parents when we felt they were too strict on us).

To be a good dad, we must learn to control our emotions, one of which is anger. Our children will sometimes provoke us, but reacting with anger or violence towards them won’t help them grow up as emotionally stable individuals. Screaming at them isn’t an effective form of communication either. Have you noticed that when you tell your children to do things out of anger, they often don't do it well? Their minds seem to shut down when they are yelled at. The old-fashioned method of physical punishment for every mistake is also not effective when done out of anger instead of love. Another emotion that must be managed is love that doesn’t allow for correction. You should never love your children to the point that they become unruly; you should allow space for them to be corrected.

To be a good father, we must let their mother have her say. In the past, it was common to find fathers scolding mothers in front of the children. Sometimes, it’s because mothers ‘overreacted’ to the children's misbehavior. In such families where this is common, you will often find the indulged children eventually becoming a burden to the parents (both father and mother).

I believe that when it comes to raising our children, we must respect their mothers’ opinions. I heard my wife say to my son once, ‘don’t drink that juice yet, it’s too early to have it.’ A few minutes later, he came to me with pleading eyes, hoping I would overturn his mother's decision. I was tempted, but I said NO. If you think their mother is too strict, then discuss it with her later when the children are not around to express your feelings.

If we want to be good fathers, we must learn to communicate with our children not only through actions but also through positive words. Many fathers are old-school. Many dads never say to their children, "I am proud of you" or "I love you" or "I'm sorry," etc. I agree with what Gerald Anthony wrote on the topic, ‘How to be a good father,’ when he said: "It’s a sort of a cliché that fathers are proud of their children... but many fathers don’t realize how important it is to actually tell their kids, not just their friends and co-workers! Your kids need to know that you’re proud of them for ... and the things that they do that you show them you’re proud of are the things they will try to do again. If you show them that you are proud of their good grades, they will strive for good grades ... if you show them that you are proud of them being a good person, or good with their siblings, or something else, they will do whatever it is that made you proud again (or at least try)."

To be a good father, we must prioritize self-improvement. When I speak at relationship meetings, I often mention that very few men read books on relationships. When you see men with books, over 80 percent of the time, it’s a book on finance - how to make more money. I believe that the worst way to learn something is through experience. Truly, we don’t know things by default; we are meant to learn. Every father should pick up a book on how to properly raise their children, read it, and act on the advice given.