Grammatical tones
Grammatical tones are those tones, which are grammatically 
    significant and, within the autosegmental framework of generative 
    phonology, they exist independently of 'segmental' 
    phonological strings. They are mapped onto specific positions in 
    the grammatical constructions in which they feature and affect the 
    tonal output of the strings in the surface form. Tone exerts a lot 
    of influence on the grammar of Urhobo as most of the grammatical 
    information available is revealed through the manipulation of 
    tones. For instance, most tense and aspectual information are 
    indicated by tones. The segmentalisation of these grammatical tones 
    usually results in the modification of lexical tones borne by 
    adjacent segments. We shall consider a few of them.
Tone in the associative noun phrase
The associative construction is also called the Noun + Noun 
    phrase. This construction is indicated by a morpheme /re/ which 
    bears a high tone and occurs between the two nouns. In normal 
    conversational speech, the vowel of this associative marker (AM) is 
    always elided but its high tone remains and gets relinked on the 
    prefix vowel of the following noun and this results in tonal 
    modifications on the second noun. Let us consider a few 
    examples:

From the examples above, we notice that while the first nouns in 
    each phrase retain their lexical tones, the prefix vowels of the 
    second nouns are all realised on the high tone given them by the 
    associative marker. Consequently, examples 6(a), (b) and (d) whose 
    second nouns in their citation form begin with a low tone become 
    high because the high tone of the associative market relinks on 
    their prefix vowel. Thus, we have a tonal modification from low to 
    high. In 6(c), because the second noun already bears a high tone, 
    no tonal modification takes place because the two high tones merely 
    contract into one high tone.
Tone in the verb phrase
Most simple verbs in Urhobo are either monosyllabic or 
    disyllabic and begin with a consonant segment. There are no minimal 
    pairs in the verb class, which differ in meaning only as a result 
    of a difference in tone patterning. So whereas we can classify 
    nouns according to their tone patterns, verbs cannot be so 
    classified. In the citation form, all verbs and all monosyllabic 
    subject and object pronouns are realised on the low tone. Although 
    a number of tonal alternations are attested in the verb, these are 
    usually motivated by the different grammatical configurations in 
    which they function. Consequently, all verbs with the same syllable 
    structure will behave alike in the same grammatical configuration. 
    For example, all monosyllabic verbs will behave alike in terms of 
    tone in a past tense construction and all disyllabic verbs will 
    also behave alike. For reasons such as these, Urhobo verbs as well 
    as monosyllabic subject and subject pronouns are assumed to be 
    underlyingly toneless and receive tone depending on the grammatical 
    configuration in which they function. As a result, tone bears a 
    great syntactic functional load particularly in the verb phrase. In 
    order to be able to analyse tonal alternations in the Urhobo verb 
    phrase, it is necessary to recognise the existence of tonal 
    morphemes (tomorphs) or grammatical tones as an essential part of 
    the grammar. These tomorphs may be single tone units or tonal 
    melodies, that is, fixed tonal patterns, which are grammatically 
    significant and exist independently of segmental strings. They are 
    quite distinct from lexical tones. They are obligatorily 
    segmentalised in appropriate positions within the grammatical 
    configuration and their segmentalisation often causes lexical tones 
    to delink or at best form a glide.
In this section, we shall consider grammatical constructions in 
    the three basic tenses, namely, the present, the past and the 
    future tenses.
The present tense
The present tense construction in Urhobo is used to convey a 
    habitual as well as a present or continuous action. The morpheme 
    marking the tense is a floating high tone, which occurs at the end 
    of the subject noun phrase. In order for this tomorph to be 
    realised, the final vowel of the subject noun phrase is lengthened 
    slightly to accommodate it. If the subject NP already ends on a 
    high tone, it is easy to perceive a lengthening of both the high 
    tone and the final vowel. If on the other hand, if the subject NP 
    ends on a low tone, the present tense tomorph is segmentalised on 
    the lengthened portion of the final vowel. We said earlier that 
    when the subject pronoun or verb is not bearing a tomorph, it is 
    realised on a low tone. Consequently, if the subject NP is a 
    pronoun, the first part of the vowel bears a low tone while the 
    lengthened portion bears the high tone. Let us examine some 
    examples. (Note: pr.t= present tomorph.)
The past tense
In the full form of the past tense, the verb appears with a 
    suffix, which is realised in two phonological shapes depending on 
    the vowel harmony requirements of the verb stem vowel. (Vowels in 
    this language fall into two groups with regard to vowel harmony and 
    the harmony feature is the Advanced Tongue Root [ATR]). 
    Consequently, the vowels /i, e, o, u,/ are [+ATR] while /แบน, a, o/ 
    are [-ART]. For a detailed discussion of vowel harmony in Urhobo, 
    see Aziza (1994, 1997)). The 
    alternating forms of the verb suffix are - ri and re. If the verb 
    stem vowel is [+ ATR], it takes the suffix -ri but if the verb stem 
    is [-ATR], it takes -re. This suffix occurs only when the verb is 
    not followed by an object; where it is, the suffix is deleted.
As for tonal alternation, the past tense construction assigns a 
    high tomorph, which is segmentalised on the only vowel segment of a 
    monosyllabic verb stem or on the final vowel of a disyllabic verb 
    stem. When the verb stem is followed by a noun object, the final 
    vowel of the verb stem is either elided or undergoes glide 
    formation resulting in the past tense tomorph being set afloat. 
    Since it is a grammatical tone, it obligatory relinks on the prefix 
    vowel of the following noun object resulting in the delinking of 
    the lexical tone in that position if it is a low. However if it is 
    a high, it contracts with the high tomorph and so the effect of the 
    relinking is vacuous. Let us consider some examples:

The future tense
In its full form, the future tense is marked segmentally by a 
    particle, which occurs between the subject noun phrase and the verb 
    stem of the clause. This particle is realised in two phonological 
    shapes /che/ and /cha/ depending on the vowel harmony requirement 
    of the verb stem vowel. If the verb stem vowel is [-(-ART], it 
    selects /che/ and if it is [-ART], it selects /cha/. This future 
    tense is used to indicate an action that is yet to commence or one 
    that is being contemplated.
Tonally, the future tense construction is marked by a H - L - H 
    tone sequence which is distributed as follows:
a) the first high tone is segmentalised on the final vowel of 
    the subject noun phrase (or the only vowel segment of a 
    monosyllabic subject pronoun).
b) the low tone is mapped onto the future tense particle, and
c) the second high tone is mapped onto the only or first vowel 
    of the verb stem and spreads onto any following vowel segment 
    within the verb stem; hence, all verb stem vowels are realised as 
    high. We shall consider some examples:

The examples above show that tonal alternations in this 
    construction result from the segmentalisation of the two high tones 
    marking the future tense. The segmentalisation of the first high 
    tone onto the subject NP results in the automatic delinking of the 
    inherent or lexical tone in that position if it is low. (This is 
    unlike what happens with the present tomorph whose segmentalisation 
    results in the lengthening of the final vowel of the subject NP so 
    as to accommodate the tomorph.) The second high tone of the future 
    tense spreads onto other vowel segments within the verb stem if the 
    verb stem is other than monosyllabic. It is unlike the past tense 
    tomorph, which does not spread. However like the past tense 
    tomorph, if the final vowel of the verb stem is elided or becomes a 
    glide, this tomorph obligatorily relinks and the result is 
    automatic delinking of a following inherent tone. In each case, the 
    effect of segmentalisation is vacuous if the inherent tone is also 
    a high.
Negation and interrogation
Negation in Urhobo is marked by a floating L H tone sequence, 
    which is mapped onto the final vowel in the phonetic realisation. 
    In order to accommodate the tone sequence, the final vowel is 
    lengthened. In the orthography this is represented by doubling the 
    final vowel. Thus we have the following:

On the other hand, interrogation is marked by a floating low 
    tone, which is realised on the final vowel of the utterance. If the 
    statement already ends on a low tone, the addition of this question 
    morpheme results in our perceiving the utterance on an extra low 
    level. However, if the statement ends on a high tone the addition 
    of the question morpheme results in the creation of a HL contour 
    but there is no lengthening of the final vowel. The following are 
    some examples:

From the foregoing, it is clear that tone has both lexical and 
    grammatical functions in Urhobo and that it is as important, if not 
    even more important, than the consonant and vowel segments used in 
    utterances.
The need for tone-marking in the writing system
We decided to give a technical treatment to our section 3 in 
    order to show that tone in Urhobo is not just a matter of choice or 
    something that is haphazardly done but that it is a systematic 
    phenomenon which is well entrenched in the grammar of the language. 
    Tone can differentiate the meaning of words as well as distinguish 
    different grammatical constructions.
A number of people object to the use of tone marks in writing 
    simply because it is not used in English and so they consider it 
    untidy. They seem to forget that English is not a tone language in 
    the sense that Urhobo is. Whether you say 
    'clear' with a high, mid or low tone, 
    the meaning is the same in English. But as we have seen, a change 
    in tone can change the meaning of words in Urhobo. If tone is not 
    marked in writing many sentences would be ambiguous and a lot of 
    time and meaning would be lost.
