Comparative evaluation of EDTA, pyridine and acetic acid 
    for the assessment of available heavy metals from domestic and 
    industrial sludges
Introduction
The increasing production of sludges derived from the treatment 
    of industrial and domestic wastewaters causes a new environmental 
    problem due to their final disposal. Sludge is recognized as a 
    valuable resource that can be recycled as fertilizer and soil 
    improvement material for land because it contains organic 
    compounds, macronutrients, micronutrients and nonessential trace 
    elements, organic micropollutants, microorganisms and eggs of 
    parasitic organisms (Alloway and Jackson, 1991). The high content 
    of organic matter and substantial N and P concentrations suggests 
    its use preferentially as a fertilizer in agriculture or as a 
    regenerator for soil. Although such application may be beneficial 
    to soil, concern about possible environmental pollution hazards, 
    for example, odor, water pollution, veterinary hazards and 
    contamination by heavy metals has to be considered (Sterrit and 
    Lester, 1980; Alloway and Jackson, 1991; Perez-Cid, et 
    al., 1996; Baveye, et al., 1999). In order to assess the potential environmental impact of 
    materials contaminated with metals, the determination of the total 
    metal contents do not provide sufficient information, since the 
    chemical forms (or species) of the metal in the sample matrix 
    determine its mobilization capacity, bioavailability and related 
    ecotoxicity (Ure and Davidson, 1995; Gupta, et 
    al., 1996). In relation to this, sequential 
    extraction method (Tessier, et al., 1979; 
    Quevauviller, et al, 1993; McGrath, 1996 and 
    Olajire, et al., 2003) and different 
    leaching tests especially batch single extractions (McGrath, 1996 
    and Ure, 1996) are the most common methods for estimating the metal 
    mobility in soil and sediment samples. Various techniques have been 
    introduced to remediate metalcontaminated soils. One of these 
    techniques is to separate the metals from soil by using chelating 
    agents to form soluble metal-chelate complexes. Chelating agents 
    such as ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) is the most commonly 
    used chelates because of its strong chelating ability for different 
    heavy metals (Norvell, 1991; Peters and Shem, 1992; Kim and Ong, 
    1998; Kim and Ong, 2000). The EDTA and acetic acid single 
    extractions have been originally developed for soil and sludge 
    analysis and they have been widely applied in this way (Ure, 1996; 
    Tack and Verloo, 1996); however little or no works were found in 
    the literature to have been carried out on comparative evaluation 
    of EDTA, acetic acid and pyridine extraction of Pb, Hg, Cd and Zn 
    from sludge samples. In our opinion, it could be useful and 
    interesting to adopt this method to evaluate the potential mobility 
    of heavy metals from sludge samples under complexing or 
    acidification processes developed in the environment, particularly 
    when the sludges are disposed on landfill. The aim of the present 
    study was to investigate the leaching of heavy metals (Pb, Hg, Cd 
    and Zn) from domestic and industrial sludges, in order to evaluate 
    the mobilizable content of them. Knowing fully well that the 
    leaching behavior of sludge may be dictated by the type of sludge 
    sample from which the sludge is obtained, a second objective of 
    this work was to find the similarities and/or differences in EDTA, 
    pyridine and acetic acid leaching behavior of domestic and 
    industrial sludges, which could be classified as highly organic 
    matter containing and typically inorganic sludges, respectively.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Sampling
The description of the sampling sites is shown in Table 1. The 
    industrial sludge samples proceeded from the wastewater treatment 
    plants of industries located at Ogba Industrial Estate, which 
    includes Chemiron Pharmaceutical industry (site 4); Wamco Dairy 
    Industry (site 5), vegetable oil industries (site 6). Other 
    industrial sludes were obtained 
    from Apapa Industrial Estate and this includes Flour Mills (site 
    7); Flour Mill Fertilizer section (site 8) and from Ijora 
    Industrial area, which only includes Nitol Textile Industry (site 
    9). The domestic sludge samples were collected at various locations 
    of wastewaters that proceeded from residence (site 1), and those 
    that proceeded from residence close to scrap metal dumping (site 2) 
    and local oil factory (site 3) in Sabo area of Ogbomoso. The 
    samples were grouped according to their district and the source as 
    follows: DS1 (site 1), DS2 (site 2), DS3 (site 3), IS1 (sites 4, 5 
    and 6), IS2 (sites 7 and 8) and IS3 (site 9) with DS, representing 
    domestic sludges and IS, representing industrial sludges. All the 
    sludge samples were collected by multiple sampling (about 2 kg) in 
    polyethylene containers and dried in the laboratory at 105 
    0C (Zufiaurre, et 
    al., 1998) in an oven to a constant weight. The 
    dried samples were ground in a mortar and then sieved using nylon 
    fiber sieve. Then the portion of samples were thoroughly mixed and 
    homogenized on a clean polyethylene sheet with occasional mixing by 
    hand. Finally, the prepared samples were bottled in polyethylene 
    containers, which were stored at laboratory temperature in 
    desiccators prior to analysis.
Reagents
All reagents employed were of high quality analytical reagent 
    grade. The stock solutions of metals (1000 g/ mL) were prepared by 
    dissolving the appropriate salts of the metals in doubly distilled 
    water. Concentrated nitric (65 %), hydrochloric (35 %) and 
    hydrofluoric (48 %) acids were employed for the digestion of the 
    samples. The 0.05 mol/L EDTA solution was prepared as an 
    ammonium salt solution by dissolving the appropriate amount of the 
    salt in concentrated ammonia solution and the pH was adjusted to 7+ 
    0.05 by addition of a few drops of either ammonia or 
    hydrochloric acid. The 0.43 mol/L acetic acid solution was 
    prepared by adequate dilution of the glacial acetic acid and 0.50 mol/L pyridine solution was prepared by dilution of 
    concentrated pyridine solution. The three extractant solutions were 
    stored in stopped polyethylene bottles.
Single extraction procedure
The EDTA, acetic acid and pyridine single extraction were 
    applied to all the pretreated sludge samples. Two replicates of 
    each sample (for each extractant) were obtained and all the 
    extractions were done in 50 mL capacity glass tubes, with the same 
    tubes used for centrifugation, in order to prevent possible loss of 
    sample. The extractions with EDTA, acetic acid and pyridine were 
    carried out as described by Perez-cid, et al, 
    2002. Approximately, 2.5, 1.0 and 1.5 g of 
    pretreated sludge sample were placed into centrifuge tube and 25,40 
    and 30 mL of 0.05 mol/L EDTA solution, 0.43 mol/L 
    acetic acid and 0.50 mol/L pyridine were respectively added 
    the mixtures were shaken for 1 h. at laboratory temperature 
    by means of a magnetic shaker. In all cases, after shaking, the 
    suspension was centrifuged for 12 min. at 2500 rpm. The 
    supernatants were quantitatively transferred to volumetric flasks 
    of 50 mL capacity, decanted into polyethylene bottles and stored at 
    4 0C until analysis. Blank extractions 
    were carried out in parallel for each set of analysis using the 
    same procedure as described above.
Total and pseudototal digestions
The determination of the total metal content in the sludges was 
    carried out by completely dissolving the matrix of the sample by 
    means of wet digestion procedure. In this case, 1.0 g of the 
    sludge sample was placed in a 250 cm3 
    round-bottomed quick fit pyrex flask and 50 
    cm3 mixture of 30 mL nitric acid (65%), 
    6 mL hydrochloric acid (35%) and 14 mL hydrofluoric acid (48 %) 
    were added in order to decompose the siliceous material present in 
    the sludge. The flask was then connected to a 50 cm tall vigreux 
    column, which was then connected to a 25 cm tall Liebig's 
    condenser unit. The entire assembly was mounted on an electric 
    heating plate. The samples were digested until clear solutions were 
    obtained (approximately 6 h.). The solutions were cooled and 
    filter through acid-washed Whatman No. 1 filter paper and 
    then made up to a volume of 100 cm3 
    using doubly distilled water. The solutions were stored at 4 
    0C prior to analysis. The pseudototal 
    digestions of the sludges were carried out as follows; 30 mL of 
    nitric acid (65 %) and 6 mL of doubly distilled water were mixed 
    with 0.1 g of the sludge samples and the entire procedure 
    was followed as described for total digestion. A reagent blank was 
    prepared for each of the digestion procedure, following the entire 
    sequence of steps as described for sample preparation in each 
    case.
RESULTS
The analytical results obtained in the studied domestic and 
    industrial sludge samples after total and pseudototal digestions 
    are summarized in Table 2. The values are given as measure of 
    duplicate determinations. As can be seen and contrary to what is 
    generally expected, not always are domestic sludges less polluted 
    than industrial sludges. Thus, in the three categorized industrial 
    sludges analyzed in this study, only sample IS1 has, for all the 
    elements studied, total heavy metals contents considerably higher 
    than those of the domestic sludges; the other two categorized 
    industrial sludges (samples IS2 and IS3) display lower total heavy 
    metal contents to the domestic sludges. The results of the 
    pseudototal digestion of all samples are also given in Table 1. As 
    was expected, the values were in all cases, smaller than those 
    obtained with the total digestion procedure. However, it is 
    important to emphasize that the results of pseudototal digestion 
    were comparable to the total digestions for most of the elements 
    analyzed in this study. The most significant differences between 
    the two methods of digestions correspond to Hg in all the domestic 
    sludge and in samples IS1 and IS2; and to Pb in industrial sludge. 
    The EDTA, acetic acid and pyridine single extractions were applied, 
    in duplicate, for metal leaching in all the studied samples. All 
    the measurements were carried out using the standard addition 
    technique and these results, expressed as a means of duplicate 
    determinations are given in Table 3. From the results of Table 3, 
    it was observed that more extraction efficiency was achieved in 
    both types of sludges when EDTA was employed as chelating agent. 
    So, greater amounts of Pb and Hg in industrial sludge samples were 
    leached using EDTA extraction procedure; Cd and Zn were extracted 
    in a similar way from both samples. In acetic acid extraction, Pb 
    and Zn were significantly leached from industrial samples IS2 and 
    IS3 whereas low extraction efficiency was observed for all the 
    metals in domestic sludges and in industrial sample IS1. When 
    pyridine was employed, the extraction efficiency was practically 
    insignificant for most of the elements studied, except for Zn in IS 
    1, with extraction efficiency of 52.8% and for Hg in IS1 and 
    IS2, with extraction efficiencies of 44.7 % and 64.7 
    % respectively. The rest of the elements were little or nothing 
    leached in these samples, since the percentages of extraction were 
    always lower than 11% except for Hg in sample DS3 (value around 
    28.6%).
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The results of elemental analysis of domestic and industrial 
    sludges using total and pseudototal digestion methods are given in 
    Table 1. The levels of Hg and Cd in sample IS 1 are clearly higher 
    than that of domestic sludge samples. The high Hg and Cd contents 
    found in sample IS1 can be attributed to the usage of these 
    elements in various products such as batteries, lamps and 
    thermometers and in other industrial processes by industries in 
    this location (i.e Ikeja Industrial Estate). The results 
    have also demonstrated that industrial wastewaters have undergone 
    some treatments before being discharged to the environment and that 
    has actually accounted for the lower total heavy metal content as 
    compared to the untreated wastewaters generated domestically. It is 
    important to stress that the total metal content found in all the 
    analyzed domestic sludge as well as industrial sludge except Hg in 
    IS1, does not potent a pollution problem in agricultural uses 
    (Sterritt and Lester, 1980). The values obtained for all the 
    elements, using pseudototal digestion method are smaller than those 
    obtained with total digestion procedure.
In order to establish a more detailed comparison between the two 
    digestion procedures, the percentages of relative extraction 
    between pseudototal and total digestion are shown in Figs. 1 
    (d) and 2 (d) for domestic and industrial sludges, respectively. 
    According to these figures, it was found, for most of the elements 
    analyzed in all sludge samples that a good agreement does exist 
    between the compared results. The percentage of relative extraction 
    ranged from 5.12 to 100% in domestic sludge for Pb, Cd and 
    Zn. The lowest extraction efficiency corresponds to Hg in the 
    domestic sludge. In the industrial sludges however, the percentages 
    of relative extraction were also elevated for Zn and Cd, and the 
    values ranged from 85.9 to 100%.
