EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AIR LIFT PUMP
ABSTRACT:- Air lift pump has been 
    predominantly used for lifting of waste-water, aggressive fluid, 
    transportation of solids and radioactive fluids in nuclear 
    recycling plants and also for deep sea mining. The air lift pump 
    performance depends on some fluid and geometric properties. 
    Experiments were carried out by setting up a model air lift pump to 
    unearth some of these parameters and their influence on the 
    performance. Thereafter a Lift Dimensionless Number (LDN) and Pump 
    Dimensionless Number (PDN) were derived to capture all the flow 
    parameters. Using the experimental results obtained a logarithmic 
    plot of the dimensionless numbers was obtained to established a 
    relationship between the dimensionless numbers. It was generally 
    observed that air lift pumps with smaller riser pipe diameters 
    yielded higher lifts. From the experiment it was also noted that 
    fluid with better adhesive properties (e.g. water) 
    produced higher lifts. For all cases of injection pressures for 
    different fluids and mixture of fluid and solid, the lift increased 
    with increasing submergence. A logarithmic plot of LDN against PDN 
    yielded a slope 0.22 and intercept -0.78. The study 
    has therefore been able to generate dimensionless parameters for 
    characterizing the lift pump.
INTRODUCTION
The air lift pump has been used for several years in the lifting 
    of waste water, water aggressive fluids and also for transportation 
    of solid mixture and for radioactive fluid in nuclear recycling 
    plants(Weber, 1982).
The method also appears well suited for deep-sea mixing provided 
    the influence of the entrance air expansion on the degree of 
    efficiency and on the lifting power of the air-liquid mixture is 
    not too adverse. The usage of air lift pump for sampling Juveline 
    Salmonds was reported by Brege et 
    al(1990).
The great variety of applications and nearly unlimited plant 
    dimension requires a scientific base in order to guarantee an 
    optimal computation for each special 
    case.As such there have been many concerted efforts to 
    fully characterize the pump. 
    Versluys(1931) was the first to give a general theory. 
    There have been many theories developed since then. However some 
    notable experimental works have equally been carried out. For 
    instance Heywood et al(1981) 
    reported experimental investigation of air lift pumping of shear 
    thinning suspensions. Similarly attempt was reported by Nigel et 
    al(1981). Wurts et al (1994) 
    determine the individual and combined pumping capacities for 
    floating air lift pump powered by a centrifugal blower. A physical 
    based model was developed by Francis (1996) to determine the air 
    flow rate required to pump a specific flow rate of water in a given 
    well designed for in-well air stripping of volatile organic 
    compound from an aquifer. An experimental study of air lift pump 
    with tapered up-riser pipe was carried out by Kumar et al (2003). 
    They reported improved performance with a tapered riser pipe. The 
    pump performance of a small air-lift system for conveying solid 
    particles was investigated experimentally by Hitoshi Fujimoto et 
    al(2003). The quasi-steady state 
    characteristics of the flows were examined for various experimental 
    conditions The critical boundary on which the particles can be 
    lifted is discussed in detail using a simple theoretical model Some 
    numerical approaches that have been attempted includes simulation 
    of vertical conveying of solid by Weber (1982) and the use of 
    integral model by Nenes et al (1996) . The integral model was used 
    to simulate air lift pump for moderate deep water well by varying 
    parameters such as pressure and void fraction. They reported close 
    agreement with experiments.
The basis of this work is however to develop some dimensionless 
    relations from experiments that can be used to characterise the 
    lift pump.
EXPERIMENTAL SET UP
In order to determine the various factors governing the 
    performance of an air-lift pump experiments were performed using a 
    model rig as shown in Figure 1.
The rig consists of a reservoir tank made of transparent plastic 
    material, in which stands the rise pipe (10mm – 25mm) also made of 
    transparent plastic material. The air line is connected to the rise 
    pipe and linked to the air compressor. The height of the liquid 
    above the state level is referred to as the lift while the 
    submergence is the length of the air pipe submerged below the 
    static level.

Description of the Experiment
The reservoir tank was filled with water. The rising pipe of 
    varying uniform diameter series (10mm – 25mm) was positioned in the 
    reservoir tank with the air line in place.
The pipe submergence was then measured and thereafter the air 
    was pumped into the injection point of the riser pipe. The lift of 
    the pump (liquid height above static level) was then measured.
The experiment was repeated five times and thereafter another 
    riser pipe of different diameter is put in place and the experiment 
    repeated all over again.
When all the uniform rise pipes had been used, the liquid in the 
    reservoir was change to kerosene and then gasoline and later to 
    liquid water-solid. For each case the whole experimental runs were 
    repeated all over again.
RESULT AND DISCUSSION
Tables 1 (a-c) showed the results obtained when the experiment 
    was run with kerosene. The air pressure was varied from13.8 
    kN/m2 to 172.4kN/m2 and submergence

from 30cm to 25cm. The graphical plot of the lift against 
    submergence ratio (submergence/total liquid depth) for different 
    fluids is shown in figure 2. It was observed that the pump lift 
    increases with increasing pipe submergence ratio. This should be 
    expected, since a greater height of the fluid will be required to 
    restore back to equilibrium for high pipe submergences.
A plot of the pump lift (height) against pressure for different 
    liquids is presented in Figure 3. By examining Table 1 it could be 
    observed that the smaller riser pipe yielded higher lift than the 
    pipe of higher dimensions. The slippage seems to be well pronounced 
    in bigger diameter pipes.
 
The results obtained when a mixture of sand and water was used 
    are presented in Table 2 while a graphical representation is shown 
    in Figure 4. From the results it was observed that for all the air 
    pressures and different submergence, the correspondent lift is 
    lower comparative to the other pure liquids. The mixture is 
    obviously denser and of considerably low cohesive properties that 
    the other pure liquids.
Based on all the aforementioned observations, it could be 
    deduced then that the liquid 
    lift(L) depends on the viscosity of the liquid ( μ ) 
    ), its density ( ρ ) 
    submergence
 
depth(Hd), actual liquid 
    static depth(Hs), diameter of 
    pipe(d) and injection 
    pressure(P). In other words, 
    L= f ( μ , ρ , Hd, Hs, d, P). Using Dimensional Analysis a relation 
    was developed as LDN =f( PDN) where,
  
    
From Table 3 generated from the experiments a logarithmic plot 
    of LDN against PDN was obtained as shown in Figure 5. The slope of 
    the graph was obtained as 0.22 while the intercept of the 
    graph was obtained as -0.76 (for the best line of fit). This 
    yielded a relation LDN = 0.17PDN0.22
 
CONCLUSION
From all of the above it can be established that pipe size, 
    configuration, submergence, air pressure and fluid type determine 
    to a considerable extent the maximum lift produced by an air lift 
    pump. It has also established the possibility of using 
    dimensionless relations to characterise the pump 
    
