Adsorption kinetics and intraparticulate diffusivities of 
    Hg, As and Pb ions on unmodified and thiolated coconut 
    fiber
ABSTRACT: As, Hg and Pb are examples of heavy metals which are 
    present in different types of industrial effluents responsible for 
    environmental pollution. Their removal is traditionally made by 
    chemical precipitation, ion-exchange and so on. However, this is 
    expensive and not completely feasible to reduce their 
    concentrations to the levels as low as required by the 
    environmental legislation. Biosorption is a process in which solids 
    of natural origin are employed for binding the heavy metal. It is a 
    promising alternative method to treat industrial effluents, mainly 
    because of its low cost and high metal binding capacity. The 
    kinetics was studied for biosorption experiments using coconut 
    fiber for As (III), Hg (II) and Pb (II) ions adsorption. The 
    specific surface area and surface charge density of the coconut 
    fiber are 1.186x1025 
    (m2/g) and 5.39 
    x1O24 
    (meq/m2), respectively. The maximum 
    adsorption capacity was found to be the highest for Pb (II) 
    followed by Hg (II) and As (III). The modification of the adsorbent 
    by thiolation affected the adsorption capacity. Equilibrium 
    sorption was reached for the metal ions at about 60 min. The 
    equilibrium constant and free energy of the adsorption at 30 
    0C were calculated. The mechanism of 
    sorption was found to obey the particle-diffusion model. The 
    kinetic studies showed that the sorption rates could be described 
    by both pseudo first-order and pseudo second-order models. The 
    pseudo second-order model showed a better fit with a rate constant 
    value of 1.16 x 10-4/min. 
    for all three metal ions. Therefore, the results of this study show 
    that coconut fiber, both modified and unmodified, is an efficient 
    adsorbent for the removal of toxic and valuable metals from 
    industrial effluents.
Introduction
As, Hg and Pb have detrimental effects on human, plants and 
    animals. The toxicity of these heavy metals to marine life and 
    consequently to man has been established for many years. The 
    sources of As pollution come from discharges of various industries, 
    such as smelting, petroleum-refining, pesticides, herbicide, glass 
    and ceramic manufacturing industries (Volesky and Holan, 1995). Pb 
    pollution particularly results from battery manufacturing, 
    automobile exhaust fumes and metal finishing industries. Hg 
    pollution results from metallurgical industries, chemical 
    manufacturing and metal finishing industries. Other sources of 
    these heavy metals also exist and these have increased as a result 
    of an increase in urbanization and industrialization. The chemistry 
    of these heavy metals is complex and interesting, especially when 
    they find their way into human metabolism. For example, the 
    oxy-anions of arsenate (V) exist in four different arsenate species 
    as H3AsO4 
    H2AsO4-, 
    HAsO42- and 
    AsO43- in the pH 
    range <2,3-6,8-10 and >12, respectively (Igwe, et 
    al., 2005a, Sadiq, 1997). Hg in the liquid form is 
    not dangerous and it is used in a number of industries. In the 
    vapour form, Hg becomes very poisonous. It attacks lungs, kidneys 
    and brain. The vapour crosses blood brain barrier and gets oxidized 
    in brain and blood stream. As affects the skin, causing skin cancer 
    in this most severe form. A massive outbreak of arsenical 
    dermatosis, observed in some parts of west Bengal state of India, 
    is linked to high levels of As in tube well water (0.2-2.0 mg/L) (Muhan and Agrawal, 2006; Namasivayam and 
    Senthilkumar, 1998). Pb is a heavy metal poison which forms 
    complexes with oxo-groups in enzymes to affect all steps virtually 
    in the process of hemoglobin synthesis and porphyry metabolism 
    (Ademorati, 1996). The incidence of these heavy metal occurrences 
    in wastewater and the above implications has resulted in research 
    on the treatment and/or recovery of these heavy metals from 
    wastewater. The treatment of effluent water from industries and 
    other sources can be achieved through adsorption techniques. 
    Sorption or the removal of toxic or heavy metals from aqueous 
    effluent has been extensively studied in recent times. The use of 
    conventional methods has been reported such as activated carbon or 
    activated alumina (Shim, et al., 2001; 
    Ouki, et al., 1997; Monser and Adhoum, 
    2002) and so on. Also, the use of the ion exchange resins and 
    precipitation methods has been the most efficient and effective 
    method for removing heavy metals from aqueous effluents, but these 
    are very expensive. As a result of the expensive nature of the use 
    of the conventional methods, researches have recently focused on 
    the use of non-conventional agricultural by-products and adsorbents 
    of biological origin. These adsorbents are abundant and relatively 
    cheap. These adsorbents have been used in the adsorptive removal of 
    heavy metals such as maize cob and husk (Igwe and Abia, 2003; Igwe, 
    et al., 2005b), sunflower stalks (Gang 
    and Weixing, 1998), chemically modified and unmodified cassava 
    waste biomass (Abia, et al., 2003), 
    sawdust (Igwe, et al., 2006), bacterial 
    algal (Volesky and Holan, 1995, Figurerira, et 
    al., 2000), fungal biomass (Guibal, et 
    al., 1992), chitosan and N-carboxymethyl chitosan 
    (Guibal, et al., 1998 ; Ngah and Liang, 
    1998), Pillared clay (Vinod and Anirudhan, 2001), sago waste (Quek, 
    et al., 1998), banana pith (Low, 
    et al., 1995), sawdust (Raji and 
    Anirudhan, 1997), Medicago sativa (Alfalfa) (Gardea-Torresdey, 
    et al., 1998), spagnum peat moss (Ho, 
    et al., 1995) and so on. In the present 
    study, the kinetics of sorption of Hg (II) As (III) and Pb (II) 
    onto modified and unmodified coconut fiber was studied at the 
    optimum pH 7.5 and the temperature 30 
    0C. The fractional attainment to the 
    equilibrium (FATE), the mechanism of sorption, the equilibrium rate 
    constant, the order of the reaction and hence the standard 
    Gibbs-free energy for the reaction at 30 
    0C were established. The adsorbent was 
    modified by thiolation to find the effect of modification on the 
    adsorptive capacity of the adsorbent.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
All of the used reagents were analytical grade, purchased and 
    applied without further purification. The coconut used was obtained 
    from a local market in Okigwe, Imo State Nigeria. The fibrous part 
    was removed, crushed in a mill, washed with de-ionized water and 
    air-dried. This was sieved to different sizes and activated with 2% 
    (v/v) nitric acid for 24 h., washed with de-ionized water 
    and air-dried. The air-dried adsorbent was divided into two parts, 
    one part was modified and the other left unmodified. The surface 
    characteristics of the unmodified coconut fibre were carried out by 
    the method of Santamarina, et al., 
    (2002). Parameters such as specific surface area 
    (SAA), surface charge density (SCD), pH of 
    slurry, bulk density, pore volume, particle density, porosity, 
    particle size and cation exchange capacity (CEC) were determined. 
    The specific surface area was determined by the methylene 
    absorption test method. The bulk density was determined as the 
    ratio of the bulk mass of the test sample to its bulk volume. The 
    cation exchange capacity was determined by the ammonium acetate 
    saturation method. An initial metal ion concentration of 2000 mg/L 
    was prepared for the three metal ions. To determine the effect of 
    contact time, a 2 g sample of the coconut fiber (half modified and 
    half unmodified) was put into a 100 mL solution of the metal ion of 
    initial concentration of 2000 mg/L. Different samples were left to 
    stand for 10, 20, 30, 40, 50,60 and 120 min. at a pH 7.5 and a temperature of 29 0C. At the 
    end of each time, the samples were filtered rapidly and the metal 
    content of the filtrates determined using a UNICAM 919 solar atomic 
    absorption spectrometer (AAS). The blank solutions were also 
    prepared and analyzed. The amounts of the metal ions adsorbed were 
    found by the difference in the average results of triplicate 
    readings. The intra-particulate diffusivities were then calculated. 
    The development of the used particle sizes and the modification 
    method by thiolation were essentially the same as those described 
    previously (Igwe and Abia, 2003; Gang and Weixing, 1998; Okeimen 
    and Okundaye, 1986).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The surface characteristics of the unmodified coconut fiber used 
    in this study is shown on Table 1. The specific surface area 
    (SAA) and the surface charge density (SCD) 
    were found to be high for coconut fiber. This suggests high 
    sorption capacity. The experimental results of the adsorption of Hg 
    (II), As (III) and Pb (II) ions on the coconut fiber waste biomass 
    are reported. Fig. 1 shows the amount adsorbed against a 
    fixed weight (1 g) of different particle sizes of the adsorbent. 
    The amount of the metal ions adsorbed against time is shown in 
    Fig. 2 for the unmodified coconut fiber. For the thiolated 
    coconut fiber, it is shown on Fig. 3. As the particle size 
    of the adsorbent increased from 150 μm to 850 μm, the adsorbed 
    amount also increased and that of Pb (II) ion was higher than Hg 
    (II), which then followed by As (III) ion. It was observed that 
    there is a slight flattening of the lines as the particle size 850 
    μm is approached. This means that beyond this point, even when the 
    particle sizes are increased, the adsorbed amount remains constant. 
    As a result, the particle size of 850 μm was used in the subsequent 
    experiments of this work.
In Figs. 2 and 3, it was observed that the amount of Pb 
    (II) adsorbed is higher, followed by Hg (II) and then As (III) ion. 
    Again, the thiolation of the adsorbent resulted in a decrease and a 
    relatively flattening of the curves. The introduction of thiol 
    groups (-SH) must have adjusted the surface characteristics of the 
    adsorbent by replacing some or all of the functional groups such as 
    -OH on the β-D-glucose units of the cellulosic adsorbent. This 
    makes the reaction more complex. These findings are similar to the 
    results of the previous studies (Abia, et 
    al., 2003). The adsorption of metal ions on 
    cellulosic materials can be attributed to two main terms: intrinsic 
    adsorption and columbic interaction (Gang and Weixing, 1998). The 
    columbic term results from the electrostatic energy of interaction 
    between the adsorbents and adsorbates. The charges on substrates as 
    well as softness or hardness of charge are mostly responsible for 
    the intensity of the interaction. Columbic interaction can be 
    observed from adsorption of cationic species versus anionic species 
    on adsorbents (Gang and Weixing, 1998).
  
     
The intrinsic adsorption of the materials is determined by their 
    surface areas, which can be observed by the effect of different 
    sizes of adsorbents (Igwe and Abia, 2003). Also, both intrinsic and 
    columbic interaction could interact at the same time. Again, the 
    transfer of a proton to the hydroxyl groups on the surface of the 
    adsorbent is also possible (Ghosh and Yuan, 1987). Specific 
    adsorption (ligand exchange mechanism) or chemisorptions of As on 
    Fe-oxide/hydroxide surfaces has been reported as taking place by 
    this method (Sadiq, 1997). Also, Grossl, et 
    al., (1997) have proposed a mechanism for the 
    specific adsorption of As (V) on goethite (∞- FeOOH) in a two-step 
    process resulting in the formation of an inner-sphere mono-dentate 
    surface complex at low surface coverage and an inner-sphere 
    bi-dentate surface complex at high surface coverage. To analyze the 
    sorption rates of Pb (II), Hg (II) and As (III) metal ions onto the 
    biomass, two simple kinetic models were tested.
Pseudo- -first-order model
The pseudo-first order rate expression, popularly known as the 
    Lagergren equation, is generally described by the following 
    equation (Lagergren, 1898) :

where, qe is the amount of the metal ions 
    sorbed at equilibrium per unit weight of sorbent (mg/g); q is the 
    amount of metal ions sorbed at any time (mg/g). Besides, 
    kad is the rate constant/min. Integrating 
    and applying boundary conditions, t = 0 and 
    qt = 0 to t = t and 
    qt = qt, Eq. 1 
    takes the form.

In order to obtain rate constants, the straight-line plots of 
    log (qe-q) against t (time) were made 
    (Fig. 4). This gave fairly straight lines for all three 
    metal ions on the unmodified and thiolated. The intercept of this 
    plot should give log qe. However, if the 
    intercept does not equal to the equilibrium uptake of metal ions, 
    the reaction is not likely to be first-order even if this plot has 
    high correlation coefficient with the experimental data (Ho and 
    Mckay, 1998). The correlation coefficients were found to be between 
    0.9125 and 0.9884. The correlation coefficients are 
    shown on Table 2 together with the Lagergren rate constants 
    calculated from the slope of Eq. 2.
 
Pseudo-second-order model
The sorption data was also analyzed in terms of a pseudo-second 
    order mechanism (Ho and Mckay, 1998) given by

where, k2is the equilibrium rate constant 
    (g/mg.min.). Integrating the above equation and 
    applying boundary conditions, i.e. t = 0 and 
    qt = 0 to t = t and 
    qt= qt, gives:

where, ho is the initial sorption rate. 
    If the second-order kinetics is applicable, the plot of t/q against 
    t in equation 4 should give a linear relationship from which the 
    constants qe and ho 
    can be determined. This was plotted and Fig. 5 shows it. The 
    plots gave a good fit to the experimental data. This means that the 
    sorption can be described by a pseudo-second order rate equation, 
    hence qe and ho were evaluated and are 
    presented in Table 2. The R2 values are 
    the same for all three metal ions and the two adsorbents with a 
    value of 0.9999. When t tends to 0, 
    ho is defined as (Horsfall,et 
    al.,2004):

where, k2is the pseudo-second-order rate 
    constant (g/mg/min). K2 was calculated for 
    the three metal ions and is shown on Table 3. The results obtained 
    are similar to a previous study (Horsfall, et 
    al., 2004).
Equilibrium and thermodynamic treatment of sorption 
    process
The removal efficiency (E) of the metal ions on the adsorbent 
    can be calculated from the equation below:
