THE STUDY OF THERMODYNAMIC PROPERTIES OF LIQUID NaCs 
    ALLOYS
INTRODUCTION
There has been growing interest in the calculating the 
    properties of Na - Cs alloys. 
    (Bhatia and March 1975; Visser et al, 1980; 
    Singh 1981). These model calculations have primarily been concerned 
    with the incipient phase separation in the Na-rich part of the 
    phase diagram. Two origins for the effect have been used. Foremost 
    is the size difference between Na and Cs 
    . (Yih et al 1982). A number of recent 
    calculations have revealed considerably improved understanding of 
    the thermodynamics of molten alloys containing strongly interacting 
    metals (Ashcroft and Stroud 1978; Hoshino and Young 1980).
Na-Cs are alkali metals and their alloys have very interesting 
    properties in the liquid state. They occur together in group 1A of 
    the periodic classification, are strong reducing agents, volatile, 
    can be distilled out of the reaction mixtures and obtained as pure 
    products, and are of bright silvery luster characteristics of 
    metals. Na is used as coolant in the valves of internal combustion 
    engines and in nuclear reactors. The cesium is the most metallic 
    and can be used as reductants in laboratory and industrial 
    processes (Fischer et al, 1967). Various 
    properties of Na-Cs liquid alloy show anomalous behaviors as 
    functions of concentration. The thermodynamics data also reveal 
    anomalous behavior (e.g., the entropy lies below the 
    ideal mixing value, and Scc (0) lies below the ideal value 
    c(1 - c), the Gibbs energy of 
    mixing is small and less than the ideal magnitude (Yih et 
    al, 1982).
The thermodynamic properties of the alloys are important for an 
    improvement in the understanding of the transport properties of 
    these materials, which often form liquid semiconductors (Cutler, 
    1977). The present interest in these alloys is based on the 
    unavailability of recent experimental results on their 
    thermodynamic properties. The experimental results available are 
    only for a limited concentration range of 0 < 
    c < 0.3 (Yih et al, 
    1982), where c denotes the concentration of the 
    A atom in the alloy. These limitations in the 
    experimental results are due to the nature of the alloys. In this 
    present study we calculate all the investigated quantities for the 
    whole concentration range. An empirical approach which is based on 
    the complex formation model of Bhatia and Singh (1980) using the 
    quasi- lattice approximation has been used in the present work, 
    because of its success in explaining concentration dependence of 
    excess-free energy of mixing and other thermodynamics properties of 
    binary molten alloys.
The layout of our paper is as follows: An introduction; Critical 
    discussion of the complex formation model as applied to Gibb’s 
    energy and activity; Results for the concentration -concentration 
    fluctuations Scc (0), the Warren -Cowley short range order 
    parameter and calculation of diffusion coefficients; Discussion of 
    enthalpy and entropy of mixing; Conclusions.
FORMALISM
The fundamental idea is that the properties of a compound 
    forming A-B alloy can be explained on the 
    basis of a quasi- lattice model in which the alloy is treated as a 
    mixture of A atoms, B 
    atoms and Aμ 
    Bv, 
    complexes, all in chemical equilibrium with one another. All the 
    atoms are assumed to be located on the lattice sites.
We assumed that the binary A-B alloy 
    consists of pseudoternary mixture 
    NA = Nc, and 
    NB = N(1-c) g moles of 
    A and B atoms, and a type 
    of chemical complex. Here μ and 
    v are assumed to be integers, 
    c is the atomic faction of 
    A atoms and N is the 
    Avogrado’s number. From 
    the complex formation model (Bhatia and Singh, 1980), we assume 
    that the complex Na-Cs is a stable compound in the solid state and 
    also exists as stable compound in the liquid state.
For the present case of Na-Cs, it follows that it consists of 
    n1 atoms of Na, 
    n2 atoms of Cs and 
    n3 moles of the complex 
    NaCs. Thus μ = 1 and v = 1. 
    From the conservation of atoms, one has

In the equation, c is taken to be the atomic 
    fraction of Na atoms. The Gibbs free energy of mixing of the binary 
    alloy can be expressed as

Here g is the formation of the complex and 
    the first term in the equation represents the lowering of the free 
    energy due to the formation of complexes in the alloy. 
    ∆G represents the free 
    energy of mixing of the ternary mixture of fixed 
    n1, 
    n2 and 
    n3 whose constituents Na, 
    Cs and NaCs are assumed to be interacting weakly with each 
    other.
The Gibbs free energy of mixing of the binary alloy can be 
    expressed as

where the Vij’s 
    (i, j = 1, 2, 3) are average interaction 
    energies and by definition independent of concentration, although 
    they may depend on temperature and pressure.
The equilibrium values of 
    n3 at a given temperature 
    and pressure are obtained from the condition

From Eqs. (3) and (4), the equilibrium values of 
    n3 are given by the 
    equation

Where

The expression for the Gibbs free energy of mixing, Eq (3), can 
    be used to obtain an expression for the thermodynamic activity 
    i.e.,

from which one can write

In order to fit parameters for g and 
    Vij , the first thing to 
    do is to calculate the value of g at the chemical concentration
 using as a starting point,
. The energy parameters 
    v12 
    v13 and 
    v23 are then adjusted in 
    order to reproduce as closely as possible the experimentally 
    measured composition dependence of the Gibbs energy of mixing. 
    Using the above method, we determine the energy parameters for 
    Na-Cs alloys as,

Figure 1 shows that the interaction parameters as given above 
    yield an excellent fit of 
    GM/RT for liquid Na-Cs 
    alloys at 383 K. We note that the only physically meaningful 
    parameter is g/RT because it is a measure of the 
    formation of the complex in the alloy. It is obvious that its value 
    (-0.45 at CNa = 0.5) is very 
    low compared with 2.80 for Fe-Al (Akinlade et 
    al, 2000) and 47.8 for K-Te (Akinlade, 1994). This 
    is an indication that Na-Cs is a weakly interacting system.

Using the interaction parameters given in Eq. (9) together with 
    Eq. (5) one can obtain numerical values of 
    n3, the number of 
    chemical complexes, and thus the values of 
    n1 and 
    n2 from Eq. (1) 
    above. Utilizing the same values of the interaction parameters we 
    show in Figure 2 a comparison of the experimental and computed 
    values of the activity. It is quite clear that our model parameters 
    give an excellent fit to this quantity.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
Concentration fluctuations, chemical short range-order 
    parameter, and chemical diffusion
Our main aim was to investigate the phenomenon of ordering in 
    the binary alloys. The first parameter investigated is the 
    concentration-concentration fluctuation in the long wavelength 
    limit Scc (0). This 
    quantity is of good interest because any deviation from ideal value 
     is significant in describing the nature of 
    ordering in a molten alloy. Because 
    Scc (0) is a response 
    function, stability requires it to be positive. A strong response 
    to a concentration-concentration stimulus shows that the system is 
    near phase separation (PS), while a weak one indicates a nearness 
    to compound formation (CF), in other words, 
     implies a tendency for heterocoordination (CF) (preference of 
    unlike atoms to pair as nearest neighbours), while 
     implies homocoordination (PS) 
    ((preference of unlike atoms as 
    nearest neighbours). For a demixing system, 
     . From a theoretical point of view, 
    Scc (0) is important 
    because it is possible to relate it to thermodynamic quantities via 
    the equation

The long wavelength limit of the concentration-concentration 
    structure factors Scc (0) 
    can be determined from equations (3) and (13) respectively. Bhatia 
    and Singh (1980) provided a more reliable expression for 
    Scc (0) which involves 
    ni, its derivative with 
    respect to concentration, 
    vij and its coordination 
    number Z, thus,

where

and

In the above equation

and the prime on the n′ s refers to their 
    first derivative with respect to c.
We note that the Flory approximation for 
    Scc (0) (which is the 
    approximation we have used to express 
    GM can be obtained simply 
    by putting Z = ∞ in the expression above. It 
    follows that by the time the Gibbs’s energy of mixing is correctly 
    fitted one would have determined all the parameters needed to 
    compute Scc (0) . In the 
    present calculation we have used typical value Z = 
    2 for our calculations.
As for the experimental values of 
    Scc (0) this has been 
    determined from activity data (Yih et al, 1982), with the aid of 
    the equation

Essentially, all that is required is to perform a polynomial fit 
    to, the experimental data and then taking an 
    analytic derivative as given in equation 15. Values obtained this 
    way are called experimental values of 
    Scc (0) .
Figure 3 shows the computed and experimental value of 
    Scc (0) as well as the 
    ideal values. We notice that the alloy Na-Cs is compound forming 
    over the whole composition range, this is because 
    Scc (0) is less than the 
    ideal values at all compositions. Also we notice that experimental 
    and computed values are not in good agreement. This might be due to 
    the fact that GM is 
    calculated in the Z = ∞ limit, while a finite 
    Z is used to compute 
    Scc (0). In addition, the 
    choice of NaCs complex gave the best fits available thermodynamic 
    information and we could not achieve better fits using order 
    complexes.
In order to fit the degree of order in the liquid alloy, 
    (Warren, 1969) and (Cowley, 1950), the short range order parameter 
    α1 can be determined from knowledge of the 
    concentration-concentration 
    Scc 
    (q) and the number-number structure factors 
    SNN (q 
    ) . However, in most diffraction 
    experiments these quantities are not easily measurable. On the 
    other hand α1 can be estimated from 
    knowledge of Scc (0) 
    (Singh et al, 1992).

The knowledge of α1 provides an immediate 
    insight into the nature of the local arrangements of atoms in the 
    mixture. For nearest neighbour sites, it can be defined as 
    
where PAB is the conditional probability 
    of finding B-atom next to a given 
    A atom. In terms of the unlike atoms equation 
    (16) can be expressed as

Z being the coordination number of the alloy. 
    From a simple probabilistic approach, one can show that the 
    limiting values of α1 lie in the range


At equiatomic composition, one has −1≤α1 
    ≤1 the minimum possible value of α1 is 
    α1min = −1 and 
    implies complete ordering of unlike atoms as nearest neighbours. On 
    the other hand the maximum value 
    α1min = 1 implies 
    total segregation leading to phase separation 
    α1 = 0 corresponds to a random distribution 
    of atoms.
From Figure 4, which shows the variation of 
    α1 with composition, we observe that it is 
    positive throughout, showing that Na-Cs is a segregating system 
    s over the whole concentration range and symmetric 
    as a function of concentration. In addition, 
    α1 is positive throughout with a value much 
    less than 1, this indicates that Na-Cs is a weakly ordered system. 
    We note that varying the value of Z does not have any effect on the 
    position of the minima of α1 ; the only 
    effect is to vary the depth while the overall features remain 
    unchanged.

A great amount of understanding at the microscopic level of 
    atomic interactions in a binary liquid alloy can be gained from 
    knowledge of the dynamic properties of the alloys.Using the 
    thermodynamic equation for diffusion (Darken, 1967), an expression 
    can be found that relates diffusion and 
    Scc (0) (Singh 
    et al, 1992) thus one can write,

Here, DM is the 
    chemical or interdiffusion coefficient and 
    Did is given as

where DA and 
    DB are observed tracer 
    diffusion coefficients. With regards to  , 
    we note that it approaches 1 for ideal mixing, is greater than 1 
    for an ordered alloy, and is less than 1 for a segregating system 
    s. The ratio is a better measure of order because it 
    does not have a direct Z dependence and thus 
    does not involve discrepancies that could come into play because of 
    the dependence of the results on this quantity. Figure 5, which is 
    a plot of this quantity, shows the existence of maxima at 
    cmm ≈ 0.3 . 
    D is close to 1 and is quite asymmetric.
