1.0 INTRODUCTION
The wastage of metals due to corrosion has become an important 
    engineering problem. With a few exceptions, metals are prone to 
    corrosion in ordinary aqueous environment. Most of these metals 
    gain wide industrial and domestic applications. Probably, no other 
    source of waste, except that affecting human life, is of greater 
    concern to all. According to Speller (1935), it is only through the 
    elimination of waste and the increase in our national efficiency 
    that we can hope to lower the cost of living, on the one hand, and 
    raise our standards of living, on the other. The elimination of 
    waste is a total asset, it has no liabilities. An accurate estimate 
    of the loss resulting from corrosion of metals is out of question. 
    From certain data, however, which are at hand regarding the average 
    annual renewal of corrugated metals, replacing corroded parts and 
    preventing corrosion is estimated to cost billions of dollars in 
    each of the industrialised countries. The cost of corrosion to the 
    U.S. economy alone is estimated to be $276 billion 
    per year (NACE, 2002). This cost is expected to increase with 
    advancement in technology and metals utilisation.
The greater percentage of pipelines failures in the petroleum 
    and gas industries is believed to be due to corrosion. For example, 
    Nwilo and Badejo (2001) reported that 50% of the oil spills in 
    Nigeria is as a result of corrosion of pipelines and tankers. Also, 
    AFX Europe (2004) reported that 1,260 joints in one section alone 
    of the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan (BTC) pipelines were found to be 
    defective due to corrosion. Our buildings, pipelines, bridges, 
    cars, machines, factories, plumbing materials, engines and wires 
    are deteriorating on a daily basis because of corrosion. There is 
    therefore an urgent need on the prevention of corrosion.
Several methods have been devised for reducing or at best 
    preventing corrosion. These include the use of the right metal in 
    the proper way and in the correct place, protective coatings 
    (painting, electroplating and greasing), the use of chemical 
    inhibitors and neutralisers, applying protective electrical current 
    (cathodic protection), drying of air and other gases to keep 
    humidity below the level where corrosion becomes serious, design of 
    hydraulic systems to avoid excessive velocities or localised 
    turbulence or to maintain a velocity high enough to prevent the 
    accumulation of corrosion products or other deposit that will 
    promote localised corrosion (Reinhold, 1989). Of all these methods, 
    the use of chemical inhibitors and neutralisers remain the most 
    practicable and cost-effective means of combating corrosion.
1.1 Basic corrosion concept
1.1.1 Definition of corrosion
Corrosion is a process that takes place when essential 
    properties within a given material begin to deteriorate, after 
    exposure to elements that recur within the environment. Most often, 
    this deterioration is noticed in metals and referred to as rust 
    (Davison and Owens, 2003). The National Association of Corrosion 
    Engineers (2002) also defines corrosion as the physicochemical 
    interaction between a metal and its environment which results in 
    changes in the properties of the metal and which may often lead to 
    the impairment of the function of the metal, the environment, or 
    the technical system of which these form a part.
1.1.2 Mechanism of corrosion of steel
The corrosion of iron and steel produces the red dust which is a 
    hydrated form of 
    Fe2O3. The reaction 
    proceeds via a galvanic mechanism in which the electrolyte consists 
    of water containing dissolved impurities. Corrosion begins when 
    regions of iron covered by water become anodic and discharge 
    Fe2+ ions into water:
The electrons travel to some other regions on the metal surface, 
    where a variety of cathode reactions occur. In an anodic medium, 
    atmospheric oxygen is quickly reduced to water:
A less vigorous reduction occurs at a higher pH:
Once the minigalvanic system is established, the two 
    half-reactions promote each other and the anode region under the 
    water develops into a corroded pit. Rust forms when the 
    Fe2+ ions are oxidised by air to 
    Fe3+ ions:
1.1.3 Forms of corrosion
Fontana (1986) established that the phrase “form of corrosion” 
    represents corrosion phenomena categorised according to their 
    appearance.
Dillon (1982) considered Fontana’s basic forms of corrosion and 
    divided them into three groups, based on their ease of 
    identification. The three categories used are:
Group 1: These are readily identifiable by 
    ordinary visual examination. These include uniform corrosion, 
    pitting, crevice corrosion and galvanic corrosion.
Group 2: These may require supplementary 
    means of examination and include erosion corrosion, fretting 
    corrosion and intergranular corrosion.
Group 3: In this verification is usually 
    required by microscopy (optical, electron microscopy, etc) and 
    include exfoliation, dealloying (selective leaching), stress 
    corrosion cracking (SCC) and corrosion fatigue.
Pitting: This form of corrosion results 
    from local action currents, as at discontinuities in protective or 
    passive films or under or around deposits that set up concentration 
    cells (Reinhold, 1989). Pitting most often, occurs with mild steels 
    immersed in water or buried in soil rather than those exposed in 
    air.
Crevice corrosion: Crevices can be formed 
    by design-detailing, welding, surface debris, etc. Available oxygen 
    in the crevice is quickly used by the corrosion process and, 
    because of limited access, cannot be replaced. The entrance to the 
    crevice becomes cathodic, since it can satisfy the oxygen-demanding 
    cathode reaction. The tip of the crevice becomes a localised anode, 
    and high corrosion rates occur at this point (Kalpakjian, 1992).
Galvanic corrosion: The best known forms of 
    localised corrosion is galvanic corrosion which occurs when two 
    dissimilar metals in contact or otherwise connected electrically, 
    are exposed to corrosive electrolyte (Gibbs, 2002). The part of 
    metal component which becomes the corroding area is called the 
    anode while that which acts as the other plate of the battery is 
    called the cathode. The cathode does not corrode but is an 
    important part of the system. In many cases, the table of 
    equilibrium potentials can be used to predict which metal of the 
    galvanic couple would corrode (Latanision and Searson, 1992). For 
    example, aluminium- graphite composite generally exhibit poor 
    corrosion resistance since graphite has a positive potential and 
    aluminium possesses a highly negative potential. As a consequence, 
    the aluminium tends to corrode in the corrosive environment while 
    the graphite remains unaffected.
Uniform corrosion: Uniform corrosion is 
    characterised by corrosive attack proceeding evenly over the entire 
    surface area, or a large fraction of the total area. General 
    thinning takes place until failure. As corrosion occurs uniformly 
    over the entire surface of the metal component, it can be 
    practically controlled by cathodic protection, use of coatings or 
    paints, or simply by specifying a corrosion allowance (Fontana, 
    1986).
In other cases, uniform corrosion adds colour and appeal to a 
    surface. Two classics, in this regard are the patina created by 
    naturally tarnishing copper roofs and the rust hues produced on 
    weathering steels. Metal pickling (scale removal by strong acids) 
    or etching leads to uniform corrosion of metals (Kalpakjian, 
    1992).
Erosion corrosion: This is the corrosion of 
    a metal which is caused or accelerated by the relative motion of 
    the environment and the metal surface. It is characterised by 
    surface features with a directional pattern which are a direct 
    result of the flowing media. Erosion corrosion is most prevalent in 
    soft alloys (i.e. copper, aluminium, and lead alloys) 
    (Dillon, 1982). Other factors such as turbulence, cavitation, 
    impingement, or galvanic effects can add to the severity of attack. 
    Erosion corrosion may be prevented by selection of alloys with 
    greater corrosion resistance or higher strength, re-design of the 
    system to reduce the flow velocity, turbulence, cavitation or 
    impingement of the environment, reduction in the severity of the 
    environment, cathodic protection, and use of corrosion-resistant or 
    abrasion-resistant coatings (Dillon, 1982).
Fretting corrosion: According to Dillon 
    (1982), fretting corrosion refers to corrosion damage at the 
    asperities of contact surfaces. This damage is induced under load 
    and in the presence of repeated relative surface motion, as induced 
    for example, by vibration. Pits or grooves and oxide debris 
    characterise this damage, typically found in machinery, bolted 
    assemblies and ball or roller bearings. Contact surfaces exposed to 
    vibration during transportation are exposed to the risk of fretting 
    corrosion.
Intergranular corrosion: The microstructure 
    of metals and alloys is made up of grains, separated by grain 
    boundaries. Intergranular corrosion is localised attack along the 
    grain boundaries, or immediately adjacent to grain boundaries, 
    while the bulk of the grains remain largely unaffected (Dillon, 
    1982).
This form of corrosion is usually associated with chemical 
    segregation effects (impurities have a tendency to be enriched at 
    grain boundaries) or specific phases precipitated on the grain 
    boundaries. Such precipitation can produce zones of reduced 
    corrosion resistance in the immediate vicinity. A classic example 
    is the sensitisation of stainless steels. Chromium-rich grain 
    boundary precipitates lead to a local depletion of chromium 
    immediately adjacent to these precipitates, leaving these areas 
    vulnerable to corrosive attack in certain electrolytes (Dillon, 
    1982).
Exfoliation: This is a particular form of 
    intergranular corrosion with high strength aluminium alloys. Alloys 
    that have been extruded or otherwise worked heavily, with a 
    microstructure of elongated, flattened grains, are particularly 
    prone to this damage (Dillon, 1982). Corrosion products building up 
    along these grain boundaries exert pressure between the grains and 
    the end result is a lifting or leafing effect.
Dealloying (selective leaching): This 
    refers to the selective removal of one element from an alloy by 
    corrosion processes. A common example is the dezincification of 
    unstabilised brass, whereby a weakened, porous copper structure is 
    produced. The selective removal of zinc can proceed in a uniform 
    manner or on a localised (plug-type) scale. It is difficult to 
    rationalise dezincification in terms of preferential zinc 
    dissolution out of the brass lattice structure. Rather, it is 
    believed that the brass dissolves with zinc remaining in solution 
    and copper replating out of the solution (Dillon, 1982).
Stress corrosion cracking (SCC): This is 
    the form of corrosion in which the cracking is induced from the 
    combined influence of tensile stress and a corrosive medium. The 
    impact of SCC on a material usually falls between dry cracking and 
    the fatigue threshold of that material (Dillon, 1982). The required 
    tensile stresses may be in the form of directly applied stresses or 
    in the form of residual stresses. Cold deformation and forming, 
    welding, heat treatment, machining and grinding can introduce 
    stresses. Usually, most of the surface of the metal remains 
    unattacked, but with fine cracks penetrating into the material. In 
    the microstructure, these cracks can have an intergranular or a 
    transgranular morphology. SCC is classified as a catastrophic form 
    of corrosion, as the detection of such fine cracks can be very 
    difficult and the damage not easily predicted (Dillon, 1982).
Corrosion fatigue: This is the result of 
    combined action of an alternating stress and a corrosive 
    environment. The fatigue process is thought to cause rupture of the 
    protective passive film upon which corrosion is accelerated 
    (Dillon, 1982). Control of corrosion fatigue can be accomplished by 
    either lowering the cyclic stresses or by corrosion control.
1.1.4 Factors affecting corrosion
Temperature: According 
    to Sharma and Sharma (2004), the rate of a chemical reaction 
    doubles for every 10oC rise in 
    temperature. Hood gave the first experimental equation which shows 
    the variation of rate constant (K) of a reaction 
    with temperature(T) and is given as:
where A and B are positive 
    empirical constants and T is the absolute 
    temperate (Jones, 1996). However, Vant Hoff in 1889, proposed 
    equation 1.7 (Sharma and Sharman, 2004):
where R is the gas constant, and 
    T the temperature. Rearranging and integrating 
    equation 1.7:
From equation 1.8, it follows that a plot of ln 
    k against 1/T gives a straight line 
    with slope equal to 
    –Ea/R. Plots of this 
    nature allow the activation energy of corrosion reaction to be 
    estimated. Moreso, if the specific rates 
    (R1 and 
    R2) at two different temperatures 
    (T1 and 
    T2), respectively are known, the 
    activation energy can be determined using equation 1. 
    9
Oxidising agents: The 
    rate of corrosion is also affected by oxidising agents. In some 
    corrosion processes such as the dissolution of zinc in hydrochloric 
    acid, hydrogen gas may evolve. In others such as the relatively 
    slow dissolution of copper in sodium chloride, the removal of which 
    must occur in order that corrosion may proceed, corrosion is 
    effected by a reaction between hydrogen and oxygen, to form water. 
    Due to the high rate of corrosion which usually accompanies 
    hydrogen evolution, metals are rarely used in solutions from which 
    they evolve hydrogen at an appreciable rate. As a consequence, most 
    of the corrosion observed in practice occurs under conditions where 
    the oxidation of hydrogen to form water is a necessary part of the 
    corrosion process. Oxidising agents are thus powerful accelerators 
    of corrosion, and in many cases, the oxidising power of a solution 
    is its most important property in as much as corrosion is 
    concerned. Oxidising agents that facilitate the corrosion of some 
    materials may also retard corrosion of others through the formation 
    of protective layers which make them passive to chemical attack.
