INTRODUCTION
Background of the Study
Motivation is considered to be the most effective vehicle needed 
    to boost the workers productivity in any sector of economy. To 
    foster the much needed high productivity and efficiency among 
    workers, there must be a deliberate and careful selection and 
    proper mix of some motivational strategies (variables).
Considering this obvious fact, Akpan (2003) opined that people 
    will act only when they have a reasonable expectation that can 
    engenda their actions and 
    consequently lead to the desired goals. A school principal, for 
    instance can perform his administrative functions creditably well 
    only if a number of motivational strategies are put in place to 
    ignite him into action and raise his morale for an effective and 
    efficient administration of the school.
Uyai, (2006) who conducted a study on the way forward for the 
    new 9-3-4 system of education in Nigeria posited that the system 
    may fail to attain its objective if the welfare of teachers is not 
    given prominence. He maintained that there is public 
    dissatisfaction on the way and manner in which 
    teachers welfare are 
    being considered by the policy makers. He considered that teaching 
    profession which hitherto was regarded as a “noble profession” has 
    now been left as a “transit camp”, a “stepping stone” or a “waiting 
    harbour” for people to hold on to till a greener pasture is 
    found.
Akpan (2003) regarded motivation as a driving force that 
    initiates a person’s action. In any organization, the workers must 
    be well motivated in order to put in their best. The staff need to 
    be fairly satisfied with their conditions of service and other 
    tangible and intangible benefits for the purpose of increase 
    output. (Green and Anderson 2005).
According to Ajayi (2001), Nigerian Education system has in 
    recent time witness ever-increasing percentage of brain drain to 
    other professions where there are better conditions of service. He 
    further stated that public opinion about teachers and the school 
    administrators’ conditions of service are sometimes in the 
    negative. People prefer belonging to other professions like 
    banking, accountancy, engineering, law, medical etc than the 
    teaching profession.
Hertzberg (1954) in Appleby (1981) noted that people will act 
    only when they have a reasonable expectation, that their actions 
    will lead to desired goals. Truly speaking, the school 
    administrator can perform his administrative functions creditably 
    well only if a number of motivational strategies are put in place 
    to catapult him into action and raise his morale for effective and 
    efficient administration of the school.
Some of the motivational strategies can be grouped under five 
    (5) levels of human needs as considered by Abraham Maslow in his 
    Needs Hierarchy Theory such as physiological, safety, social, 
    esteem and self-actualization. However, where these needs are not 
    considered by the policy makers, the principal, having spent 
    considerable years of training and having climbed the ladder to the 
    position of a principal yet not being able to meet the social 
    status of his contemporaries in other professions, becomes 
    frustrated and finds it difficult to put in his best in the 
    administration of the school system.
Akpan (2004) looked at administration as an act of directing 
    people and materials towards the achievement of a pre-determined 
    organizational goal. In the other hand Ozigi (1977) considered the 
    principal to be the school administrator who is also an executive 
    head that takes decisions and implement government policies and 
    educational programmes.
Robertson (1998) noted that a properly motivated school 
    principal would develop a high degree of morale and job 
    satisfaction needed for efficient and effective administration of 
    the school system. Such motivational strategies include: regular 
    training, job security, promotion as at and when due, recognition, 
    conducive working environment and participation in decision 
    making.
There is somewhat job dissatisfaction amongst the public school 
    principals. Intrinsic factors such as achievement, recognition and 
    responsibility related to job satisfaction are not put in place. 
    Accordingly, the factors that lead to job satisfaction are distinct 
    from those that lead to job dissatisfaction (Robbins 2000). Not 
    until a decade ago teachers had no opportunity of being appointed 
    into the position of a permanent secretary like their counterparts 
    in the core ministries. They were regarded as incapable of handling 
    such high office. Only a few principals were allowed to climb to 
    what was known as principal special grade (that is grade level 16). 
    Majority of the principals terminated at principal grade II (that 
    is grade level 14) or principal grade I (that is grade level 
    15).
Steers, Ungson and Mowday (1995) considered salary differentials 
    among workers of equal training, experience and qualification as a 
    stumbling block towards job satisfaction and optimum productivity. 
    Robbins and Coulter (2004), writing on Abraham Maslow’s Needs 
    Theory (1954) considered self-actualization needs as a person’s 
    drive to become what he or she is capable of becoming.
Public school principals can only put in their best in terms of 
    effective administration of the schools when their perception of 
    self-actualization in their chosen career is envisaged. However, 
    they become dissatisfied and of low morale when they notice 
    professional dichotomy on the selection for appointment into higher 
    and sensitive positions. The slogan “teachers’ reward is in heaven” 
    does not help matters either for the practitioners. Hopson (2006) 
    in McCleland (1976) posited that high achievers differentiate 
    themselves from others by desiring to do things better. These 
    caliber of workers need challenging job other than a daily routine 
    work as it is applicable to the principals’ schedule of duty.
Akpan (1995) considered school to be an institution set aside to 
    educate the members of the community. Whether a school system is 
    successful or not, depends largely on the kind of education 
    policies put in place by the education authority. The quality of 
    the practitioners with the principals at the helm of affairs of the 
    school administration depends of course on the measure of 
    motivational strategies but in place to boost the morale of the 
    principals towards effective and efficient administration of the 
    school system.
In the school setting, the principal is the executive and the 
    academic head of the administration. There are also vice principals 
    to assist in the day-to-day running of the administration and the 
    teachers of various ranks all of whom are given specific 
    responsibilities (Edem, 1982).
The researcher, worried over the poor performance of some public 
    secondary schools principals in terms of effective administration, 
    decided to investigate the motivational strategies put in place by 
    the education authority and their influence on the principals’ 
    administrative effectiveness of public secondary schools in Akwa 
    Ibom State.
Statement of the Problem
The problem of this study was to investigate the differences in 
    principals’ administrative effectiveness of public secondary 
    schools in Akwa Ibom State based on the specified motivational 
    strategies. Robertson (1998) who carried out a study of the school 
    system revealed that there is a fall in standard of education in 
    all the levels of education in Nigeria. The most affected is the 
    public secondary schools which are headed by the principals as the 
    academic and administrative head.
Inadequate motivation of the principals, adversely affect their 
    administrative performance. This observation is evident on the poor 
    students’ performance in both internal and external examination 
    (Mgbodile 1986). This problem has led to the decay in teaching and 
    learning in our schools. The infrastructural facilities such as 
    laboratories, school blocks, dormitory blocks, dinning hall and 
    teachers quarters are in the state of complete dilapidation. School 
    plants, libraries and instructional resources are in a very poor 
    and deteriorating conditions. Teachers salaries and other fringe 
    benefits such as leave and transport grants, science teachers 
    allowance, technical teachers allowance are seldomly paid. Long and 
    protracted strike actions have become regular features in our 
    school system (Obonigi 2001).
Adeyanju (2000) posited that there is mass movement of teachers 
    from teaching profession to where there are greener pasture. The 
    few that remain have turned “teachers – businessmen” in order to 
    make some additional fund to cater for the welfare of the 
    semi-starved members of their families.
In the other hand Ukpong (2004) observed simple amenities such 
    as tables and chairs are not provided enough to go round in the 
    staff room. The principals and the vice principals squart in 
    cubicles in the name of offices with little or no provision for 
    ventilation. Materials such as chalks, chemicals in laboratories, 
    pen, pencil, exercise books for notes of lesson are in short 
    supplies.
He further maintained that school heads are not given the 
    opportunity to attend seminars and workshops as their counterparts 
    in the ministry or any other government parastatals and yet 
    government is making yearly budgetary allocation for our education 
    sub-sector. Based on the foregoing, the problem of the study is, 
    how do principals of public secondary schools in Akwa Ibom State 
    differ in administrative effectiveness, on the basis of some 
    specified motivational variables?
Purpose of the Study
This study investigated the differences in principals’ 
    administrative effectiveness based on the specified motivational 
    strategies. Specifically, this study determined:
1. The differences in principals’ administrative effectiveness 
    based on regularity of training.
2. The differences in principals’ administrative effectiveness 
    based on job security.
3. The differences in principals’ administrative effectiveness 
    based on promotion.
4. The differences in principals’ administrative effectiveness 
    based on recognition of achievement.
5. The differences in principals’ administrative effectiveness 
    based on job enrichment.
6. The differences in principals’ administrative effectiveness 
    based on conducive working environment.
7. The differences in principals’ administrative effectiveness 
    based on participation in decision making.
8. The joint differences of principals’ administrative 
    effectiveness based on regular training; job security; promotion; 
    recognition of achievement; job enrichment; conducive working 
    environment; and participation in decision making.
Significance of the Study
The importance of administrative effectiveness usually manifests 
    in the different administrative task areas of the public school 
    principal. How effective the public school principal can be seen in 
    the quality of the different tasks he/she performs. The different 
    problem areas facing the public school administrator 
    consistute the daily 
    administrative challenges he/she must handle. For instance, coping 
    with lack or inadequate or outdated physical facilities such as: 
    laboratory equipments and apparatus; lack of office accommodation 
    for both teaching and non teaching staff, lack of regular water 
    supply, non-exting or epileptic 
    electricity supply, poor funding, incessant transfer of teachers, 
    lack of boarding facilities and so on.
The study was designed to investigate the extent to which 
    motivation strategies are put in place for the principals’ of 
    public secondary schools. The findings and recommendations of the 
    study would be of immense benefit to various interest groups 
    including the government, principals and teachers of secondary 
    schools, State Secondary Education Board, students, researchers, 
    other stakeholders in education as well as the general public as 
    follows:
It would help to identify the motivational strategies that 
    influence principals’ administrative effectiveness of public 
    secondary schools.
The findings of this study will be of immense benefit to the 
    education planners in rearranging such motivational strategies that 
    will engender the principal administrative effectiveness of the 
    public schools. It will be of great significance and benefit to the 
    public school principals, the teachers and other stakeholders in 
    the best way of managing public schools. Researchers and students 
    in tertiary institutions who may wish to venture into the area of 
    motivation and school administration will find the findings of this 
    work as a useful reference materials for their work.
Research Questions
The following research questions were formulated to guide the 
    conduct of the study:
1. What is the difference in Principals’ administrative 
    effectiveness in public secondary schools on account of regular 
    training?
2. What is the difference in Principals’ administrative 
    effectiveness in public secondary school on account of job 
    security?
3. What is the difference in principals’ administrative 
    effectiveness in public secondary school on account of regular 
    promotion?
4. What is the difference in principals’ administrative 
    effectiveness in public secondary schools on account of recognition 
    of achievement?
5. What is the difference in Principals’ administrative 
    effectiveness in public secondary schools on account of job 
    enrichment?
6. What is the difference in principals’ administrative 
    effectiveness in public secondary schools on account of conducive 
    working environment?
7. What is the difference in principals’ administrative 
    effectiveness in public secondary schools on account of 
    participation in decision making?
8. What is the difference in Principals’ administrative 
    effectiveness on account of regular training, job security, regular 
    promotion, recognition of achievement, job enrichment, conducive 
    working environment and participation in decision making?
Research Hypotheses
The following null hypotheses were formulated to guide the 
    conduct of the study and would be tested at 0.05 level of 
    significance.
H01: There is no significant difference 
    in principals’ administrative effectiveness in public secondary 
    schools on account of regular training.
H02: There is no significant difference 
    in principals’ administrative effectiveness in public secondary 
    schools on account of job security.
