CHAPTER ONE
INTRODUCTION
1.1 Background To The Study
The Ekid language is one of the languages of the Lower Cross. 
    Although the Ekid language has been in existence for centuries now, 
    only little linguistic description has been done on it. The 
    language does not have any published lexicographical work, a 
    situation which has generated great concern for the development of 
    the language to prevent it from going into extinction.
Lexicography is the branch of Applied Linguistics whose primary 
    concern is the selection of lexical items and entries for 
    dictionary making and writing of a lexicon (Crystal 1985:.179).The Ekid-English dictionary is needed primarily to document 
    Ekid language for future generations and to meet the basic needs of 
    the average Ekid speaker in his/her day-to-day use of the 
    language.
This aim is achieved by selecting entries for the dictionary and 
    providing quality information for each entry. Thus, in this study, 
    a sizeable number of everyday vocabulary and adapted loans words 
    are included. In anticipation of the specialized needs of language 
    researchers and others interested in linguistic information on 
    Ekid, the phonological and grammatical information has been 
    incorporated for each of the entries. Pictures of some of the 
    entries have been inserted in the Ekid-English dictionary to make 
    it as informative as possible and for documentation purposes.
1.2 Statement Of The Problem
A dictionary is a reference book containing the words of a 
    language or language variety, usually alphabetically arranged with 
    information on their forms, pronunciations, functions, meanings and 
    idiomatic uses (Kipfer 1984:.2).The process of making a 
    dictionary is technically referred to as lexicography. This process 
    is influenced by several factors including size coverage (that is, 
    the number of headwords), time factor, orthographical matters, etc. 
    This process cuts across various levels of linguistic analysis 
    which include phonetic, phonological, morphological, syntactic and 
    semantic. However, the process of producing an Ekid-English 
    dictionary is dependent, to a large extent, on the existence of an 
    Ekid database, the hardware and software tools. This study attempts 
    to produce an Ekid-English (bilingual) dictionary which is part of 
    language documentation project since it is written in Ekid and 
    meanings are provided in English.
1.3 History Of Ekid People
According to Udo (1983:.72), the Ekid people are found in 
    the southern part of Akwa Ibom State. They live behind northeast of 
    Ibuno. They are separated from the Atlantic Ocean by a region of 
    swamps. The Ekid community extends from the southern coast to Ikot 
    Ubo in Ubium Clan in the north, a distance of about fifteen 
    kilometres. Eket town, which is the headquarters of Eket Local 
    Government, is situated by the Kwa Iboe River.
The Ekid people were described by the early Europeans as 
    “Warlike Ibibio”, “very wild Ibibio”, and truculent savages 
    … who had a wonderful knack for 
    bubbing up again and giving 
    trouble after being beaten by British Officers. “From a military 
    point of view”, they were the most “sporting tribe imaginable”, and 
    were “no respecter of persons” (Udo 1983:.72-73).The British 
    Political administrators made seven separate expeditions to bring 
    the Ekid people to order. According to Udo (1983:.73), the 
    Ekid people were the first batch of Central Ibibio who, pressed by 
    new arrivals of Central Ibibio, migrated southwards to their 
    present home. Some of them migrated to Ibuno area, but finding land 
    in Ibuno unsuited for agriculture, burial, etc, they swung back to 
    the mainland and settled.
Eket is the whiteman’s version of 
    ‘Ekid’ which is the people’s word for 
    themselves, their language, and their area (Adiakpan 2000:.96). The Ekid people must have entered Nigeria before 1,500 
    B.C and must have reached the Atlantic Ocean “wall”, beyond 
    which they could not go, before 1000 A.D. Their major 
    settlement was first at the place called Nta Ikang (Adiakpan, 
    2000:.96).The Ekid people belong to one of the earliest 
    immigrants of the Suddanic or Semi-Bantu people. In some of their 
    stories, they talk of meeting or seeing a people they call Ndong 
    Ama Ama Isim – short gorilla-like pigmies of East Cameroun, whom we 
    are told are very much like those of Congo-Kinshasa (Adiakpan, 
    2000:.94).
The Ekid people started the last lap of their journey which 
    brought them to their present location from the southern uplands of 
    what is today the Cameroun Mountain 
    Range.Where they lived before they came to these uplands or 
    regions is not yet known. Some claim that they came from an area 
    between former Ikom Local Government Area and Ikang both in Cross 
    River State.Some groups of 
    people who later on joined and stayed with Ekid people tried to pry 
    into the worship of the gods of the Ekid people. There arose a very 
    serious fighting, arson and killing of 
    people.The trouble makers 
    were driven away into many areas now regarded as part of Ibibio 
    land. Some Ekid people also moved out from there and occupied 
    different areas of the present Ekid territory and beyond. From 
    looking for a dry land during that movement inland, they got their 
    name -‘Ekid’ [ĕkíd] - “do you see or have you seen dry land?” As 
    far as Ekid people are concerned, Ekid means the settlement or land 
    that the people were looking for, and eventually found (Adiakpan, 
    2000:.95).
1.4 Ekid Language: Classification, Speakers And Historical 
    Development
Ekid is the name of a language as well as the name of the 
    speakers of the language. Ekid is spoken as the main and dominant 
    local language in Eket Local Government Area of Akwa Ibom State by 
    a population of about two hundred thousand speakers (Connell, 
    1991:.8). Ekid language is closely related to Ibibio, Efik, 
    Anaang, Oro and Ibuno languages. It has dialectal differences with 
    Ibibio and other Lower Cross languages. There is unidirectional 
    intelligibility between Ekid and Ibibio. Speakers of Ekid 
    understand and speak Ibibio fluently without learning, but speakers 
    of Ibibio do not understand and speak Ekid fluently without 
    learning.
1.4.1 Classification
According to Williamson (1989), Ekid belongs to the Lower Cross 
    Subgroup family of the Delta group of the Cross River Sub-branch of 
    the New Benue-Congo branch of the Niger-Congo sub-family of the 
    Niger-Kordofonian language 
    family.The Lower Cross language group takes its name from 
    its geographical location, being situated in the lower part of the 
    Cross River basin of South Eastern Nigeria. The group spans three 
    Nigerian States of Rivers, Akwa Ibom and Cross River as well as the 
    international frontier to the Isangele sub-division of 
    South-Western Cameroun (Connell 1994). More recent classification 
    has placed Ekid in the Lower Cross group of the Cross River 
    Sub-branch of Proto Benue-Congo of the Niger-Congo phylum 
    (Williamson and Blench, 2000).The table below shows the language 
    family of Ekid.
1.4.2 Historical Development Of Ekid
Ekid language is as old as the people themselves, dating back to 
    centuries ago (Adiakpan 2000). However, there are scanty works on 
    the language by Simmons (n.d.); Udo (1983); Connell 
    (1991, 1994); Urua (1996); Urua, E. E, Jackson and Udoyo 
    (2002); Udoyo (2004), and Udoyo and Wilson (2006).
1.5 Purpose Of The Study
The absence of any comprehensive lexicographical publication on 
    Ekid language has helped to create an undesirable vacuum and the 
    need to fill this vacuum has been one of the motivations for 
    undertaking this study.The 
    purpose of this study therefore is to document the Ekid language 
    for future generations by producing a bilingual (Ekid-English) 
    dictionary from a database and make it available for the Ekid 
    Community. The choice of a bilingual dictionary is to provide 
    lexical resources for effective translation from Ekid to English 
    and vice versa.
1.6 Scope Of The Study
This study is basically on the collection of about one thousand 
    vocabulary data on Ekid language/culture, using a methodology based 
    on Perl scripting to store and produce an Ekid-English dictionary. 
    The entries in this bilingual dictionary are limited to headwords, 
    transcription, word classes, etymology, meaning equivalents and 
    pictures of some headwords that are not universal. Other dictionary 
    entries like illustrative sentences, idioms and proverbs are not 
    included due to time, funds and material constraints.
1.7 Significance Of The Study
This study is not only a fulfilment of the post-graduate 
    requirement but also a contribution towards the preservation of 
    Ekid language (from going into extinction). First, in a bid to 
    preserve the Ekid language from a speedy death and make it relevant 
    to this twenty-first century, the study offers to build an Ekid 
    database and then convert the data into a bilingual dictionary.
It is hoped that this study will benefit researchers (in 
    subsequent times) and help to promote the writing system of Ekid 
    language as well as trigger off more interest in its 
    study.The work aims at 
    creating empirical foundation for high quality linguistic analysis 
    and contribute to the development of the Ekid 
    language.This research 
    will definitely be useful to students, teachers and the Ekid 
    speaking community.
1.8 Methodology
This study focuses on the production of an Ekid-English 
    (bilingual) dictionary and therefore requires a dictionary making 
    
    application.Therefore; the researcher employed the 
    methodology based on Perl scripting. The research method is 
    described as follows:
1.8.1 Data Collection
A vocabulary of about one thousand words was collected from Ekid 
    speakers to build the database. Specifically, the data were 
    collected from five informants using structured wordlists like the 
    Ibadan 400 Wordlist and the SIL Comparative African Wordlist 
    (SILCAWL) to elicit some relevant data. The 400 Wordlist and the 
    SIL Comparative African Wordlist consist of vocabulary items made 
    up of basic vocabulary such as flora and fauna of the local 
    environment, body parts, kinship 
    terms,numerals, colours, verbs, adjectives, words denoting 
    daily activities and items from the pronoun 
    class.A lot of data were also 
    collected from specific events like marriage and burial ceremonies 
    in their natural settings and from the daily interactions of 
    members of Ekid community using a functional video camera and audio 
    camera. A corpus was built from the collected data to produce the 
    dictionary and the elicited data were transcribed phonetically into 
    written text materials.
In addition to these, a digital camera was also used to capture 
    some data for picture database building. Dictionaries (like Ibibio 
    Dictionary and Macmillan English Dictionary), textbooks related to 
    the subject matter, website, publications and journals on phonology 
    and morphology were also consulted.
1.8.2 Data Analysis
The data collected were studied and examined in detail to aid 
    analysis.Ekid phonemic 
    consonants and vowels were analyzed using the classical phonemic 
    principles or discovery procedures, particularly minimal pairs and 
    free variation to enable us ascertain the difference between 
    phonemes and allophones.
Two words which differ in meaning when only one sound is changed 
    are referred to as a ‘minimal pair’, 
    e.g., pin versus 
    bin in English (Crystal 1991:.219). To 
    establish the phonemic status of Ekid vowels and consonants, the 
    following examples of minimal pairs are provided:
Minimal pairs and free variation are discovery procedures used 
    in phonology to determine which sounds belong to the same class or 
    phoneme and which sounds occur in the same environment but fail to 
    effect a change in the meaning of the word.
Free variation occurs when two phones appear in the same context 
    without causing a change in meaning (Hyman 1975:.65). The 
    vowel [u] is an allophone of [u] and they occur in free variation 
    e.g. [búp] and [búp] ‘àsk’. Also, 
    [p] and [b] occur in free variation at word final position as in 
    [ʤìp] and 
    [ʤìb] ‘pinch’. 
    Other examples include:
1.8.3 Data Processing
The collected data were entered into a table of five columns 
    (consisting of headwords, transcription, word classes, etymology 
    and meaning equivalent) and sorted in alphabetical order in word 
    processing application using a laptop. These were done to enable 
    the insertion of the IPA characters and diacritics (tone marks). 
    The Charis SIL font was used in this study for the IPA 
    symbols/diacritics.
1.8.4 Data/Information Export
After processing the data, the unformatted table of five columns 
    was then exported to Microsoft Excel Spreadsheet and converted to 
    Comma Separated Value (CSV) file. This file enables Perl to rip the 
    cells (i.e. the process of joining the columns and 
    exporting to a text file) into a properly formatted document.
