INTRODUCTION
The study of meaning is a tasking exercise. Meaning has been 
    viewed as the most elusive and controversial phenomenon in language 
    study. Its' vague nature gives 
    room for diverse interpretations depending on the speaker, the 
    hearer and the situation. Philosophers, anthropologists and 
    linguists have tried to give solution to the unstable and ambiguous 
    nature of meaning but could not. It is because of the status of 
    meaning, certain problems associate with its analysis in natural 
    languages. Several theories of meaning have been propounded to 
    address these problems. This paper therefore aims at discussing 
    some problems associated with the analysis of meaning and a current 
    theory which has reasonably addresses these problems.
PROBLEMS ASSOCIATED WITH THE ANALYSIS OF MEANING IS 
    NATURAL LANGUAGES.
There are certain problems associated with the analysis of 
    meaning in natural languages. Some of the problems are discussed 
    below. The problem of graded boundaries hinders proper analysis of 
    meaning in natural languages. Jackendoff (1996) cited in Udofot 
    (2004:.140) observe that:
In talking about the colour "red" in 
    English one is faced with a broad range of lavender so that at a 
    point one may have a problem of hues from orange to lavender so 
    that at a point one may have a problem of noticing where orange 
    stops and lavender begins...
According to her, there is also borderline case where a 
    particular colour can be seen as red, orange or lavender depending 
    on the context. Similar problems exist for a word like 
    fat: What for instance is the lower boundary of 
    a fat woman? When or at what size can a woman be described as thin, 
    medium or fat? are relevant to the problem of graded boundaries.
Ambiguity is another problem 
    encountered in the analysis of 
    meaning in natural languages. Ambiguous words or utterance are 
    those open to diverse interpretations depending on the linguistic 
    context. For example the expression "she is nice", calls 
    for different interpretations. The word 
    "nice" could mean 
    "caring, kind, accommodating, beautiful, 
    and other virtues. Another aspect of ambiguity of utterance is 
    seen, when an utterance is seen, when an utterance requires a true 
    or false response which cannot always be true or false. That is to 
    say, the utterance can be interpreted as true under a set of 
    conditions in a possible universe and false under another. Lyons 
    (1977:.169) observes: "it there is a possible 
    world in which a sentence is both true and false, we can say that 
    the. sentence expresses two district propositions.
Also seen as a problem in meaning analysis is the fact that what 
    does not exist for a particular person or people, does not feature 
    in their speech and has no name or meaning for them (Udofot 
    2004:.136). What this means is that object to which humans 
    refer in their utterance have meaning only when they are within 
    their knowledge. They may not necessarily be objects that exist. If 
    such objects are mentioned outside the knowledge of the hearer(s), 
    it brings a serious problem in its analysis.
In the same vein, absence of the shared knowledge, as well as 
    the beliefs, conventions and presuppositions between the speaker 
    and the hearer can cause a very serious problem in the analysis of 
    the meaning of a given utterance. The presence of these contextual 
    features is important for a proper interpretation of an 
    utterance.
Another problem associated with meaning analysis is subjectivity 
    and introspection of concepts. It is difficult to have objective 
    meaning of words and utterances if everyone has to look into the 
    mind. Haas (1973:.20) said 'an empirical science 
    like linguistics cannot be content to rely on a procedure of 
    looking into their minds; each into his own". Also, 
    some theories define meaning in terms of "symbol - Image - 
    Referent relationships" which only apply to concrete things 
    not obstructions. For instance, one cannot see the mental picture 
    of liberty, air; courage 
    courage and so on.
Moreover, the fact that people have different ideas about things 
    is a problem in meaning analysis. Udofot (2004) has it that "a 
    well described picture can be perceived differently by different 
    people depending on their intellectual capacities, power of 
    imagination and backgrounds ( p62). 
    A person who has not experienced an eclipse of the sun can never 
    arrive at having a clear image of it no matter how well it is 
    described. Potter (1957) in his summation had it "that 
    many people think through movements, gestures, ritual acts and many 
    other ways instead of seeing with the mind's eye.
Also, not all concepts are observable. This is viewed as a 
    problem in meaning analysis. As earlier stated, abstract nouns for 
    instance, are not observable. To explain a word like 
    "nice" one would say something like 
    beautiful, hand 
    some, charming," assuming that the 
    hearer already knows in his mind the meaning of these words. In 
    doing this one has to go to the mental bank where the meanings of 
    the words used in explaining another word are stored.
Furthermore, interpreting meaning based on the 
    in image visualized by the hearer is a 
    shortcoming in meaning analysis. Here meaning is conceptualized in 
    terms of the image that a particular object calls up in the mind 
    which is associated with the world. The image conceptualized may be 
    false. For instance, the difference between a hen and duck can 
    easily be visualized by calling up their images but scientifically 
    one would have to resort to descriptions using such terms as + LONG 
    NECK (Udofot 2004:.142).
It could also be however established as a problem the situation 
    where propositions vary depending on the time and place of 
    utterance. This means that every utterance occurs in a particular 
    spatio-temporal situation (Lyons; 1968:.413). This consist of 
    the speaker, the time of speech, the person spoken to, the action 
    of the speaker and hearer at the time and the other object and people also present. Lack of knowledge of all these can 
    seriously hamper meaning analysis.
Finally, a problem is viewed where many expressions used in 
    natural languages do not have single referents. For instance, the 
    expression "that young-man is my brother". One cannot 
    maintain whether a true or false proposition is expressed without 
    considering who the speaker and the reference. Also one may not 
    actually know the extent of relationship between the speaker and 
    the referent. Is he a biological brother, cousin, a male family 
    member or member of the same denomination?
A CURRENT THEORY WHICH HAS REASONABLY ADDRESS THESE 
    PROBLEMS.
A current theory recommended which has reasonably address the 
    above stated problems associated with the analysis of meaning in 
    natural languages is the pragmatic theory. Pragmatics according to 
    Levinson (1983:.24) is the "ability of language 
    users to pair sentences with the context in which they would be 
    appropriate". Pragmatics has a 
    "user-centred" description of language.
Pragmatics theory enables one to interpret not only the literal 
    meaning of an utterance but also the meanings that 
    drive from the nouns of formality 
    and politeness. This formality exists in the environment where the 
    language is used couple with the unstated meanings gotten from the 
    shared previous knowledge of the speaker and the situation in which 
    the utterances are used. Pragmatics is a recommended theory because 
    it is eclectic in nature. This means that it is all encompassing. 
    It incorporates the dimensions of context, concept, culture, 
    deixis, presuppositions, implicatures, besides paralinguistic 
    features in the interpretation of meaning. Pragmatics more or less 
    gives a comprehensive analysis. Pragmatics takes into account both 
    observationble 
    and unobservable aspects of a language events. According to Ndimele 
    (1997:.117) it cuts across "the choices the users make, 
    the constraints they encounter in using their language for social 
    interaction and the effect their use of language has on other 
    participants".
CONCLUSION
The paper looks at the problems associated with the analysis of 
    meaning in natural language. The 
    problems cut across graded boundaries, ambiguity, absence of 
    objects in a particular society; absence of shared knowledge, 
    beliefs, convention, subjectivity and introspection, perception, 
    multiple referents for a particular object among others. Pragmatics 
    has been discussed as a current theory which has reasonably 
    addressed these problems.
