INTRODUCTION
During the earlier stages of language learning there is a great 
    upsurge of enthusiasm among students of language and linguistics. 
    There existed then a feeling of great optimism in the air and it 
    was generally believed that many problems pertaining to language 
    were being solved so that a major breakthrough was imminent.
Now in the 1970's that feeling of optimism relieved some 
    people and they came to realize that there is another important 
    aspect of language learning that needs to be dealt with and that is 
    the aspect of semantics - the study of meaning. This difficulty is 
    to decide what kind of meaning they have been using and whether 
    their use of it has been legitimate. It is with this end in view 
    that I will now return to look at the different kinds of meaning 
    outlined by theorists. I shall also be looking at the different 
    theories of meaning not in order to say anything new about them but 
    simply to indicate the areas of discussion they cover, the kinds of 
    problems they raise and an advance theory that came into existence 
    because of their lapses.
PROBLEMS ASSOCIATED WITH THE ANALYSIS OF MEANING IN THE 
    NATURAL LANGUAGES AND PRAGMATISM
The term semantics came into popular use within late 
    19thc with the publication 
    of the Meaning of Meaning by two renowned authors of language. In a 
    bid to establish a definite study to meaning, the scholars came up 
    with the notion that "semantics analysis of a given language 
    must explain how words, sentences, including non-linguistics 
    features like gestures and facial expressions are understood, 
    interpreted and related to objects and situations in the real 
    world." Udofot (2004:.6).
The scholars also insist that some factors which must interact 
    to make a symbol or sentence meaningful to the hearer include: the 
    speaker, the hearer, the intellectual levels of development, their 
    shared beliefs, backgrounds (which include the individuals 
    antecedents) and the general situation of utterance. Within this 
    explication, there is the problem, if a particular word or sentence 
    have the same meaning to the same speaker in the same situation and 
    in other situations.
In an attempt to proffer solution or answer to this question. 
    The nominal theories came into existence. The propounders have it 
    that the meaning of a word/thing is the name given to it. Hence, 
    the problem of it being only useful in explaining the meanings of 
    not only a restricted group of words but also abstract nouns like 
    beauty, happiness and 
    freedom together with verbs like to 
    know and the 
    feel do not lend themselves easily to such 
    explication. Again, onomatopoeic sounds are quite few and they are 
    silent about sentence meaning. So that, the nominal theory is not 
    regarded as a comprehensive model for the analysis of meaning in 
    natural languages.
In addition to the aforementioned theory is conceptual theories 
    with its scholars. They instituted that meaning is the mental idea 
    or a concept of the word in the mind. Theirs also have its 
    shortcoming in that conceptual theories encourage subjectivism and 
    introspection. The 
    theories definitions of meaning in terms of 
    Symbol-Image-Referent relationship applies with concrete things not 
    abstraction, attributive adjective, verbs and structural words. 
    Moreover, its definition of meaning contradict the laws guiding the 
    formation of human mind and intellectual capacities, power of 
    imagination and the 
    persons background.
Consequently, came the contextual theories. Their analysis of 
    meaning bores down to the contention 
    that the meaning of a particular word or utterance is equivalent to 
    its use. In this theory willingness to add to the notion of meaning 
    came its flaws. This has to do with the fact that studying meaning 
    in context narrows the list of 
    potentials meaning to the fact 
    that not all concepts are observable adds more to its demerits. 
    More to their criticism is that one of their proponent's view, 
    is rather limited in application. This is because, it applies to 
    situations that are observable and demonstrable.
In addition to the pitfall of the contextualists is 
    Bloomfield's Behaviourism which does not account for the 
    number of situations in real life. This has to do with where the 
    thing mentioned is not present at the moment of speaking.
Due to the shortcomings of the afore-stated theories, 
    componential analysis of meaning emerge. It involves the use of 
    semantic features in expressing the meaning of words.
Hence one of its limitations is that it defines only word 
    meaning. This amongst all the problems of meaning serve as a 
    serious omission. This is because, human being use not only words 
    but also sentences for communications. Again is that it uses binary 
    opposites, in the belief that all lexical items can be expressed 
    using this approach. Another, do not give definitions for word 
    meaning while truth conditions is rather limited in 
    applications.
Despite all these problems noted of these theories. There is an 
    advanced and recent theory which takes cognizance of the factors 
    considered when meaning is to be analysed. The propounders of this 
    theory include Morris (1938), and Carnap (1958) et al. To highlight 
    more on the advance nature of the theory, it incorporates the 
    situation in which the utterance is produced, the share previous 
    knowledge and the linguistic context. So that, Ndimele (1997:. 117; Udofot 2004:.26) see pragmatics as the analysis of 
    meaning that takes into account not only the observable aspects of 
    a language event but also the unobservable; the choices they 
    (users) make, the constraints they encounter in using their 
    language for social interaction and the effect their use of 
    language has on other participants 
    ." Hence pragmatics incorporates other theories like 
    conceptual, contextual, deictics, speech acts and other foremost 
    theories that did not take into consideration;
(a) the meaning which has to do with the norms, formality and 
    politeness that exists in the society;
(b) The unstated meaning that derives from the shared values of 
    the speakers meaning noted form their previous knowledge and
(c) The situation in which the utterances are used.
All these factors enhanced in this one theory makes it relevant 
    in every linguistic environment and to survive where others 
    fail.
CONCLUSION
Inspite of the lapses 
    encountered by the earlier theories. They truly serve as a stepping 
    stone to the invention of other later theories. This is seen in 
    pragmatics theory, which incorporates conceptual, contextual, 
    implicatures, language, culture, style and deictics to itself.
