1.2 Focus of the Study
Phonology studies the sound system of languages and aims at 
    demonstrating the patterns of distinctive sounds found in a 
    language. It makes possible general statements about the nature of 
    sound systems found in languages of the world; is also concerned 
    with the range and functions of sounds in specific languages, and 
    with the rules, which can be written to show the types of phonetic 
    relationships that relate and contrast linguistic units (Crystal, 
    1991:.261). The Phonological Rules of a language mainly deal 
    with its phonological processes and the distinctive features of its 
    segments. Considering what phonological processes and distinctive 
    features are, a study of a language’s Phonological Rules would then 
    capture and take care of a reasonable aspect of the language’s 
    phonology.
A Phonological Rule, in the words of Trask (1996:.273), is 
    “any rule which, in some analysis, is posited as involved in 
    deriving a pronunciation”. That is, it deals with rules 
    appealing to morphological and lexical information as well as 
    phonetic (allophonic) rules. Phonological Rules also convert 
    phonological representations into phonetic forms by really 
    explaining and bringing out the exact condition under which a 
    phonological process takes place. This can be stated in terms of 
    classes of sounds to which the rules apply, and the classes of 
    sounds can be described in terms of features of which they are 
    composed. A Phonological Rule in English, for instance, may state a 
    consonant is palatalized when it occurs before a front vowel and 
    can be written thus:
Such many other rules could be found in English or any other 
    natural language through careful study. In the process of studying 
    a language’s Phonological Rules, it would be easy to recognize the 
    language’s segments’ distinctive features, and this would really 
    pay off since there is scanty literature on an in-depth explanation 
    or revelation of a language’s Phonological Rules. This is the 
    essence of this research, which will automate for documentation, 
    the establishment of Phonological Rules in Anaang, a Lower Cross 
    Language spoken in Akwa Ibom State of Nigeria.
1.3 Background Information on the Anaang People
The name, Anaang implies both languages and ethnic group 
    (people). This section and the next therefore gives some 
    information about the people of Anaang as well as the Anaang 
    language.
1.3.1 Origin and Migration
History has it that the Anaang people, together with other 
    Bantus originated from the central Benue valley in Nigerian and 
    probably moved through the Northern sector of the Cross River to 
    the Enyong Creek. They eventually traveled through the present day 
    Eastern Ibibio land (Ikono) to settle at the location of present 
    day Abak (Greenberg, 1963, cited in Nyarks, 2002:.21). Essien 
    (1983:.5-6, cited in Nyarks 2002) - who argues that life had 
    already existed along the banks and valleys of the rivers and in 
    Cross River thousands of years before the Bantus migrated to that 
    side - points out the origin of the Anaangs to be Ibom, near Aro 
    North-West and East of the Cross River along the highland of 
    Cameroon. He notes that the Anaangs were there many thousands of 
    years before the Cameroonians settled there.
In a bid to find a new location for their unification and 
    maintain their identity as a people, the Anaangs migrated from the 
    Cross River coast to Abak, through Eket, Oron and Western Nsit 
    where some of them also settled. That is why Udoh (1983:.9) 
    notes that the roots of Afaha Eket in Eket Local Government Area, 
    Afaha Ikot Ebak in Essien Udim Local Government Area, Afaha Obong 
    in Abak Local Government Area, Afaha Nsung in Okobo Local 
    Government Area, Afaha Nsit in Nsit Ibom Local Government 
    Area and many other Afahas (italics mine) could be traced 
    to one stock. They accept all Afaha people as blood Kinsmen i.e imaan. Esema (2002:.7), who 
    corroborates this account, also notes that the Anaang people 
    religiously accept and follow the adage, “Afaha Ikidde 
    Afaha ikpa ekong”, meaning literally that an Afaha man 
    can do no harm to a fellow Afaha man.
Notwithstanding the oral traditions1 
    During an interview with Dr. C.T. 
    Udoh, a seasoned Historian, he maintained that the Anaangs have 
    always been where they are now. They dispersed to their present 
    location from Abak. and written records regarding Anaang 
    origin and migration, there seems to be a consensus that the 
    present Anaang counties and councils are a result of migration from 
    Abak. Forde and Jones (1967:.83, cited in Nyoyoko, 1997:.9) give a reticent and vivid account of this:
The Anaang society appears to have originated from a 
    single society or group of villages all situated close to the 
    present Abak Local Government Area headquarters. Thus, each of 
    these villages is regarded as the parent village from which new 
    settlements lived off in various directions…ancestors came from 
    Ikot Imo in Abak Local Government Area. However, most traditions 
    identify the place of secondary dispersal with Afaha 
    Obong.
1.3.2 Location and Population
In Nigeria, the Anaang people are in Akwa Ibom State, 
    South-South of the country. They are the second largest ethnic 
    group in Akwa Ibom State, occupying the Northwestern part of the 
    state with a total land area of 2.73square kilometers and an 
    average density range between 600 and 800 people per square mile. 
    (Nyoyoko, 1997:.9, Micheal and Obot, 2001:.14). From 
    the 1991 census result, the people number about 1 million (Connel 
    1991:.8; Urua, 1996:.51; Grimes, 2000:.167). 
    Udondata (2006:.2) puts the Anaang population at 4 million, 
    though he does not state his source and date, but the 2006 census 
    result puts Anaang total population at 2.4 
    million2This information is 
    from the National Population Commision..
They are bounded in the North by the Isogbo Igbo (Abia State), 
    in the West by the Ngwas (Abia State) and Ndoki (Rivers State) and 
    in the South, East and Northeast by the Ibibios. They occupy eight 
    of the thirty-one L.G.As of Akwa Ibom State, namely; 
    Abak, Essien Udim, Etim Ekpo, Ikot Ekpene, Obot Akara, Ika, Oruk 
    Anam and Ukanafun.
1.3.3 Nomenclature:
The name, Anaang, was first mentioned in 1854 by Sigismund 
    Wilhelm Kolle (a German missionary in Sierra Leone) in his book 
    Polyglotta Africana, where he reported that 
    Anaang was one of the languages spoken by liberated slaves in 
    Sierra Leone (Udoh, 1983:.83). There is the need to mention 
    that usage of the name bore a different spelling - 
    “Annang”. After Sigismund Koelle in 1854, this 
    spelling has been used even until this 
    21st century. Other linguists (and 
    non-linguists) however prefer to write it as Anaang. Going by the 
    Lower Cross phonology, a syllabified pronunciation of 
    “Annang” would be /unclear 
    / while that of Anaang would be 
    unclear. Even a child at the 
    infantile lisping stage would agree that s/he normally hears adult 
    natives pronouncing the latter, not the former. 
    “Anaang” (rather than “Annang 
    ) is therefore a better 
    graphical expression of the native speakers’ pronunciation of the 
    name. I therefore prefer the usage of Anaang in this work over and 
    above every other.
The name, Anaang, according to Udoh (1983:.2) and Umana 
    (2002:.1-2) is derived from the characteristic behaviours of 
    a tribe who are clothed with fury, indignation, intolerance and 
    vindictiveness. Perhaps, in line with this, Udoh (1983:.99) – 
    who believes that Anaang is a part of Ibibio - says Anaang is from 
    the Ibibio words 
    Anaanga (to be 
    intoxicated with alcohol), Anaang 
    Ide (to be intoxicated with bravery), 
    Unnang (black dyed 
    raffia worn by Ekpo 
    Onyoho masquerader). He infers therefore 
    that Anaang means ‘wild’ or 
    ‘warrior’ since the Anaangs fought many wars 
    against the Ngwa Igbos to preserve and protect their farmlands and 
    territories against invasion.
1.3.4 Ethnic Affinity
Just like Udoh (1983:.99) already mentioned above, there 
    is the belief that Anaang is a part of Ibibio. In line with this, 
    Udoh (1983:.2) however notes that Anaang and Ibibio only have 
    common dialects and intermarriage traditions with none a part of 
    the other. Based on this commonness, the ancestors of the Anaangs 
    and the Ibibios were classified by the colonial masters and 
    missionaries as one race or group of family. One of the 
    colonialists had once written that “the Anaang are Ibibio 
    people speaking a dialect of Ibibio, populating the areas covered 
    by the Abak Division and Western half of the Ikot Ekpene 
    Division” (Udoh, 1983:.84).
This may have been because of the fact that the colonialists had 
    not yet entered the Anaang land, and when they did, they heard them 
    speak similar dialects of Ibibio with similar patterns and then 
    grouped them as one family or race. One of the Colonial District 
    Officers in Abak District, Mr. S. E. Johnson 
    had stated in 1932 that the Anaang sub tribe seemed to have been 
    the last to have come in contact with the Europeans because they 
    were the last area in the Calabar Province to be opened up by the 
    Government (Udoh, 1983:.84). Following the colonialists’ 
    claims, some Ibibios are still of the strong view that Anaang is a 
    sub-tribe of Ibibio. To give credence to his view, Udoh (1983:.86) quotes an Anaang anthropologist to have said that “it is 
    generally believed that the entire group now forming the 
    Southeastern state belongs to the Bantoid group 
    … the Anaang have the same history 
    of migration as the Efik-Ibibio.” The point here is that the 
    Anaangs, Efiks and Ibibios may have migrated differently from 
    wherever they were originally, to settle at the Cross River 
    coast.3 Based on this also, 
    Udoh (2003:.34) notes some historians like Noah (1994:.27) to have concluded that the different ethnic groups in Akwa 
    Ibom state may have migrated from one place, even though they 
    settled in their present abodes at different times. As a 
    result, they intermarried, shared certain things and features and 
    became one. However, a time came (as noted by Essien 1983:.14, cited in Nyarks, 2006:. 2) when the Anaang ancestors 
    wanted to secure a special entity for themselves in order to 
    separate themselves from the Ibibios and exist as a distinct tribe 
    with their own language, tradition and culture. This led to their 
    migration story as related in section
1.3.1. Quote Wardhaugh****
Still to prove the Anaang ethnic affiliation with Ibibio, Udoh 
    (1983:.89) mentions that the Ibibio State Union held her 
    inaugural meeting in Ikot Ekpene (an Anaang land) in 1928, and the 
    Anaangs joined the Union freely. But Udoh (1983:.16) mentions 
    that the Anaang people who resisted the inclusion of their tribe in 
    Ibibio wanted the name to be written Ibibio and Anaang Union. 
    Therefore, the name was not agreed by the majority of Anaang 
    people. He maintains that the Union, not created to transform the 
    Anaang people into Ibibio was a joint programme set up by the two 
    ethnic groups for unification and development.
In line with Udoh’s account, Umana (2002:.3) reveals 
    that:
The first politico-cultural organization recorded in the annals 
    of people movement in Nigeria was the Anaang Union formed by one 
    Udosen Obot of Ikot Ekpene in 1927 
    … the progenitor of the then Ibibio State College 
    … The land on which the college stands 
    was donated by Udosen Obot to the Anaang Union and later to the 
    Ibibio State Union which emerged as the amalgam of Anaang Union and 
    Ibibio state movement in 1928. The Anaang Union was so popular that 
    it soon embraced the whole of the mainland divisions of the then 
    Calabar Province, metamorphosing…into the Ibibio Union in 1928. The 
    metamorphosing brought about serious ethnic squabbles between the 
    Ibibios and the Anaangs causing the name to be changed in 1953 
    (August) to Ibibio and Anaang Union.
In as much as this is not a political document to speak for or 
    against any ethnic group as a parent body or affiliate, it is apt 
    to note from the arguments in this section that if given the 
    latitude, there would continue to be claims and counter-claims 
    beyond doubt about the parenthood and offspringship of various 
    ethnic groups in the state as just seen above. Therefore, it would 
    be more sensible to toe Udoh’s (2003:.34) line of 
    appreciating the need of a people to carve out an identity, whether 
    separate or related to other groups. It would really pay off to 
    respect such sentiments at any time they are expressed in as much 
    as we all look forward to language development because one mark of 
    identity of a people or ethnic group is the language they speak, 
    for example Oro, Ibibio, Anang, Ekid, etc. With the 
    culturally-related outlook of the various groups in Akwa Ibom 
    state, coupled with mutual intelligibility of some languages, it 
    would be better to talk about ethnic affinity than ethnic 
    affiliation.
