The quest for meaning dates back to the days of Plato, Aristotle 
    etc. Before now meaning was studied as a branch of philosophy. 
    Later in the 20th century, it was 
    situated in linguistics 
    Semantic is the technical name of the branch of linguistics which 
    deals with the study of meaning. Meaning was not referred to in 
    semantics but it was developed. Semantics tries to study meaning in 
    a scientific and objective way.
Meaning in natural language has no 
    straight forward jacked 
    definition because one word can stand for two or three things. 
    Thereby, making it ambiguous, classically unstable and illusive. 
    These factors have caused meaning to be the most elusive and very 
    controversial phenomenon.
So many people have tried to define meaning in different 
    derogatory statement. This knowledge is out to the ambiguity of 
    certain words or conditions. According to Palmer, the understanding 
    of meaning is the ability to understand and ascertain it in a given 
    context. Lyon also said that the meaning of a word is determined by 
    the use (context), i.e. the use can help you, the 
    context can help you but it cannot ascertain the exact meaning of 
    the word. J. R. Firth suggested that in order to 
    understand meaning. It must be split into some component defined by 
    Indication to some context.
These different approaches and controversies have given rise to 
    various theories of meaning
The first theory was the Nominal theories. These was the very 
    first attempt to solve the problem associated with the analysis of 
    meaning in natural languages. Nominal theory tries to find the 
    relationship between a name and the object, that what a particular 
    word means is the name given to the object. In other words, words 
    are names or labels for things or objects e.g. the 
    word cup that theory is a relationship between a 
    word cup, and the object 
    cup.
The nominal theories are useful to an extent in explaining 
    meaning but they are rather restricted. These restrictions are some 
    of the problems of meaning in natural languages. The nominal 
    theories could only explain proper nouns, onomatopoeic, some 
    adjectives but could not explain abstract nouns, verbs.
Another weakness of the nominal theories is the fact that it 
    cannot explain sentence meaning. For those reasons the nominal 
    theories are not regarded as an adequate and comprehensive method 
    of interpreting meaning in natural languages.
After the nominal theories came the conceptual theories. These 
    theories stated that, the form of 
    the word signified things by virtue of the concept associated with 
    the form of the word in the minds of the speakers of that language. 
    The meaning of a word or expression to be the concept associated 
    with it in the mind of the speaker or hearer. The theories are 
    subjective because it is subjective to individual interpretation. 
    In all the theories have it that meaning a mental picture, that is 
    called up in the mind, when a word is mentioned.
Just like the nominal theories, the conceptual theories has its 
    own weakness which makes it inadequate for the analyzing of meaning 
    in natural languages. Some which are, the fact that it does not 
    across culture and individual (no room for cultural differences). 
    It interpret meaning as concepts rather than name. It subject 
    meaning to subjectivism, thereby making meaning too 
    scientific
Contextual theories came after the conceptual theories was 
    dim inadequate to analyze meaning 
    in natural languages.
The contextual theories have it that meaning should be related 
    to context or use. That meaning should be studied in terms of 
    situation context, use, onward and observable correlates of 
    language behaviour.
The contextual theories defined meaning of a word to be its use 
    in the language thereby making meaning cultural bound i.e. meaning be tied to the use.
The contextual theories also has it own weakness, some of which 
    are: The contextual theories restrict meaning to context, situation 
    or use, words are not use in isolation but in 
    context A word must be 
    conceptualized before it contextualized etc.
I will recommend pragmatics as a current theory which can 
    address the problem of the previous theories like the contextual, 
    conceptual and nominal theories.
Pragmatic explain how a hearer can succeed in retrieving from an 
    uttered sequence of words the interpretation intended by the 
    speaker and also derive further information constituting the full 
    impact of the utterance. It also 
    analysis meaning taking into account not only the observable 
    aspects of a language event but also the unobservable. Pragmatic 
    covers the domain of concept, context, deixis, implicatures etc. It 
    also consider the meaning of a particular speech event uttered in a 
    particular situation.
In pragmatics the intentions of the speakers the effect of the 
    speaker's utterance on his listener, the implications of 
    saying something in a particular way, the knowledge and beliefs 
    about the world upon which both the speaker and the hearer rely 
    when they communicate are also taken into account in a pragmatic 
    interpretation of meaning with the result that the hearer 
    interprets what was intended and more.
Conclusion: It is for all these reasons that I consider 
    pragmatics as a current theory which can reasonably address this 
    problem associated with the analysis of meaning of natural 
    languages
