When language matters
To grasp the meaning of the world of today we use a 
    language created to express the world of yesterday. The life of the 
    past seems to us nearer our true natures only for the reason that 
    it is nearer our language". By Exupery, from his book: 
    ‘Wind, Sand and Star’, (1939).
This is the month in which Arabic language was born practically 
    over 1,440 years ago. With the revelation of the Qur’an, seed of that language became firmly planted grammatically, 
    phonologically and morphologically. Until the coming of the divine 
    revelation called the Qur’an, Arabic remained for 
    thousands of years without syntax. Thus, Ramadan 
    can be described as the historic month of revolution without which 
    humanity would have continued to rigmarole in the wilderness of 
    ignorance.
Language, generally, is not just a means of communicating and 
    understanding ideas and experiences. It is also an instrument of 
    documenting and relating the events and occurrences of the past to 
    the future via the present. Language is the prima 
    facie of any culture. A tribe or community without a 
    language lives without a culture.
Every language is primarily spoken either by words of mouth or 
    by gesticulation but became converted into writing for the purpose 
    of recording sounds and preservation of history. It is the 
    foundation of all civilisations in all human eras. It is man’s 
    greatest invention without which all other inventions including 
    scientific and technological inventions would have been 
    impossible.
Whether in spoken or written form, language comes to serve as 
    the main intermediary among the races and tribes of mankind, 
    yesterday, today and tomorrow. The birth and death of humans; the 
    rise and fall of empires; the migrations and settlements of nations 
    and tribes are all announced or chronicled in languages. Even some 
    inanimate objects speak onomatopoeically sometimes to the 
    admiration of man.
It is with language alone that every human thought germinates 
    and is turned into reality from dream. Not only that, language is 
    also the cultural law that governs the 
    wild life be it agro or aqua. The nature of language, its 
    importance, its complexity and its role in human life are such 
    that, this world would have been meaningless without it.
Allah tells us in Qur’an 49:13 thus: 
    "Oh people! We have created you from a male and a 
    female and made you into nations and tribes that you might interact 
    with one another. Surely the noblest among you is the most 
    righteous of you. Allah is wise and all-knowing".
The idea of this topic arose from a question posed to me 
    recently by a Lagos Muslim socialite. He said: "rather than 
    observing Salat in Arabic language which we do 
    not understand why don’t we do it either in English or vernacular 
    which we understand very well?" He cited the example of the 
    Churches where Christians worship in various but understandable 
    languages and concluded that such an innovation might bring more 
    converts to Islam and more people to the Mosque. He did not stop 
    there. He went further to advocate for reduction in the number of 
    times we (Muslims) observe Salat daily saying 
    that that might be ‘more realistic’ and 
    ‘more convenient’ especially for busy 
    and travelling people. You can see, from that question, the extent 
    of naivety which ignorance is capable of conferring on its victims. 
    Or how else will you judge a mortal being who wants to amend the 
    constitution of his Immortal Creator? And our brother is not the 
    only one with such a parochial idea. There are some others like 
    him.
In my response, I asked the enquirer to tell me why Islam 
    remains the fastest growing religion in the West today despite 
    their worshipping in understandable languages in the Churches in 
    that part of the world. I made a particular reference to Britain 
    where Churches are sold to Muslims in scores to be converted into 
    Mosques and asked him to tell me any religion he knew that was ever 
    revealed in English language.
I did not stop there. I also went further to ask him whether it 
    was reasonable to let his employees work for only three days in a 
    week instead of six days while he pays them fully for the whole 
    week. I then took advantage of the glaring evidence of confusion on 
    his visage to put burner in my fervour as a student of English 
    language and tutored him a little on the fact that English which he 
    parochially perceived as an ideal language was not original. I told 
    him how England was colonised severally for centuries by various 
    countries and empires including France, Germany, Italy and 
    Scandinavia. I let him know that English only emerge as an adopted 
    language from a combination of the languages of England’s colonial 
    masters in the 10th century (A.C). I pointed out to him that 
    not only about 9,700 words of the modern English language were 
    borrowed from French and Anglicised but also that most of the 
    clustered consonant words in English are either German or 
    Scandinavian in origin. I cited examples of such words as 
    ‘acknowledgement’, 
    psychology, knight, 
    pseudo, gnash, 
    rhythm, solemn etc. There is 
    also a great influence of some other Indo-European languages, 
    especially from the Upper and the Lower Germanic on English 
    language. Besides, I pointed it out that the country called Britain 
    today, which is a combination of England, Scotland and Wales, is 
    not a monolingual country as sometimes misconceived by most people. 
    Other languages like Celtic and Welsh are still very much spoken in 
    that country today, though restrictedly.
I then settled him down to religion proper and called his 
    attention to the original common language of revelation of the 
    ‘Tawrah’ (Talmud) of Prophet Musa (Moses), the Zabur 
    (Psalms) of Prophet Daud (David) and ‘
    injil’ (Bible) of 
    Prophet Isa (Jesus) which is Hebrew. The Jews still worship in that 
    language today.
In countries like China, Japan, Korea and India, where religions 
    such as Buddhism, Confucianism, Taoism, Shinto and Hinduism are in 
    vogue, the languages of worship by the adherents are Chinese, 
    Japanese, Korean and Hindu. And, in terms of numerical strength, no 
    religion in the world today enjoys so large follower-ship as 
    Buddhism which is closely followed by Hinduism because of the huge 
    populations of China and India. Yet the worship in those religions 
    does not go beyond their countries of nativity.
In the West where Christianity holds sway, no single language 
    was adopted for worship after the death of Latin which was the 
    official language of the Roman Empire. While the Germans worship in 
    German, the French, the Spanish, the British, the Americans, the 
    Italians, the Swedish, the Danish, the Russians, the Polish, the 
    Norwegians, the Portuguese and others, all worship in their 
    respective languages.
This means that no French or Russian man can worship with 
    understanding in a Portuguese Church except he understands 
    Portuguese language. This is not the case with Islam. The 
    fulfillment of Allah’s global will for mankind is a universal 
    reality today. That will is contained in Qur’an 
    21:107 thus: "We have not sent you (Muhammad) forth but 
    as a mercy to the entire world. Say it is revealed to me that your 
    God is one God. Won’t you submit to Him?"
It is only in Islam, of all religions, that adherents from 
    Brazil, Finland, Nigeria, Pakistan and Australia can easily walk 
    into any Mosque in China or Japan or Saudi Arabia and worship 
    jointly behind an Imam without any fear of language discrimination. 
    And that is what makes Islam the universal religion that Allah 
    wills it to be. This is made possible by Arabic language which is 
    the language of the revelation of the Qur’an. In all 
    other religions of the world, adherents, irrespective of their 
    populations, do worship only locally according to their 
    languages.
To call for the abandonment of Arabic language in 
    Salat, therefore, is to call for the reduction 
    of Islam from a universal religion into a local one. Not only that, 
    such a call is a way of advocating for the dismantling of global 
    Muslim unity.
What our pitied socialite brother does not know is the fact that 
    worshipping in Arabic which is the language of the revelation of 
    the Qur’an is the main cause of antagonism against 
    Islam by those who have lost the originality of their religion. 
    That "Allah is wise and all-knowing" as 
    quoted above is not in vain. All divine religions were deliberately 
    revealed in the languages of their ‘Messengers’. And no Messenger was sent to the 
    entire world except Prophet Muhammad (SAW).
Arabic, as a language, has become assimilated into Islam as a 
    culture. As a matter of fact, it is with that language that the 
    Muslims imbibed the formidability and courage of resistance which 
    enabled Islam to survive all intrigues, aggressions and 
    intimidations of many empires through the centuries.
As a culture, Islam remains irrepressible for two main reasons. 
    One reason is that it is a spiritual rather than a physical nation 
    with an everlasting ideology. Even if its adherents are conquered, 
    the idea that makes that religion a nation can never be conquered 
    because it is invisible. The other reason is contained in 
    Qur’an 15:9 thus: "It was ‘We’ who 
    revealed the Qur’an and ‘We’ will certainly preserve 
    it".
Formidability of a culture depends very much on the tenacity 
    accorded its language by the speakers of that language.
Sometimes a culture may get absorbed into another culture 
    without losing its accompanying language. Sometimes, a language may 
    be assimilated into another language even as the culture is 
    retained. Islam has resistance for both. The early Muslim Arabs did 
    not take only Islam to all conquered nations, they took Arabic, the 
    language of the Qur’an as well. The only exception is 
    Persia (now Iran) which was equally strong linguistically. 
    Countries like Iraq , Syria , Lebanon , Egypt , Morocco , Libya , 
    Algeria and Tunisia were not Arabic speaking until Islam spread to 
    them.
We have similar example here in Nigeria. The Fulanis, who, led 
    by Sheikh Uthman Dan Fodio, re-introduced Islam in its purified 
    form to the conquered areas now called northern Nigeria, had to 
    compromise their language in favour of Islam which was their 
    culture. The Hausas, on the other hand, preferred to sacrifice 
    their pagan culture in favour of their language. Thus, the 
    combination of both has come to give the northern Nigeria a 
    foremost cultural veracity that is almost second to none in Africa. 
    Not only has Hausa language become an international language spoken 
    in the media of most civilised countries, Shari’ah 
    has also been imbibed as the Islamic cultural law of the region.
Today, while most parts of the Southern Nigerian region have 
    enslaved themselves irredeemably to foreign cultures, the north 
    gives a new hope of cultural renaissance to Nigeria and even 
    Africa. From the cultural way the northerners dress and eat, from 
    the way they insist on speaking Hausa language irrespective of 
    where they find themselves, it is becoming clearer that adoption of 
    that language in the UN is just a matter of time. Already, 
    virtually all the countries that matter in the world today have 
    Hausa programmes on their radio and television stations. And far 
    from the self-deception of the southern people who want to eat 
    their cake and still have it, the long expected African 
    civilisation may start from northern Nigeria. The numerical 
    strength of that region is an added advantage.
It is rather unfortunate that the southern Muslims have had to 
    join non-Muslims in replacing their cultural language with the 
    colonial language. The tragedy of this development is that while 
    they are losing their own language, they are unable to grasp the 
    foreign language for which they are craving. In both ways, they are 
    the losers not only today but tomorrow as well.
Prophet Muhammad (SAW) though counseled Muslim Ummah on the need 
    to understand languages other than mother-tongues, nevertheless, he 
    did not support the abdication of one’s own language.
