Inside the world of men
‘It’s a man’s world’ is a 
    familiar expression. This argument was taken to the stage in the 
    satiric Tarzan Monologues that premiered at 
    Terrakulture last weekend, Joe Agbro Jr., writes 
    
The stage was set for a masculine show - five male mannequins 
    clad in various apparels in corners of the stage hinted at male 
    ego. Dressed as a hip young man, one of the mannequins had a hooded 
    top over a Nigeria branded T-shirt and held a microphone; another 
    one was seated dressed casually in jeans, a T-shirt and leather 
    slippers; one had the full complement of protective gear for 
    motor-bikers; another one was dressed in a caftan made from green 
    local fabric and had hone of his hands in handcuffs. At corners 
    were a chair and a drum. This was the setting at the world premiere 
    of Tarzan Monologues, written and produced by 
    Wole Oguntokun. The venue of the performance was Terrakulture, a 
    classy arts café at Victoria Island, Lagos.
And in about 27 short-takes, the monologues dwelt on the world 
    of men from their own angle. Taking turns of about three minutes 
    each, the seven actors took the stage explaining issues such as 
    money, sex, women, sexual abuse, pressure, sterility, virginity, 
    job loss, age, marriage, and infidelity from a man’s standpoint. 
    And as each actor rambled on, the others posed sitting, standing, 
    and blending with the mannequins already on stage. It was such that 
    at one point, it seemed as if the mannequins would also come to 
    life with groans of being misunderstood too.
Starting with fair skinned Kanayo Okani in E get as e 
    be, he rings on the importance of money. Later on, he 
    talked about the trappings of going to America. Then, Paul Alumona 
    causes a stir as he gets up to explain how his aunt introduced him 
    to the alluring world of sex. She was 32 and he was 13; and now 
    seventeen years later, whenever he looks at women, he sees his 
    aunty in them. In Jack Gowon’s mother, Kunle 
    Adeyoola, a half of the rock group, Rooftop Mcs 
    highlights the type of expectations which some mothers place on 
    their children. Precious Anyanwu in Hadijat, 
    talked of girl, the daughter of a palm-oil seller and palm-wine 
    tapper whom he frolicked with as a child but, who pretends not to 
    know him anymore. Then, women’s supposed greed is also captured 
    when an actor exclaimed, "when you see the greed in my eyes, 
    it is her greed shining through my eyes." The frustration of 
    the jobless man is also seen when he is consigned to lugging 
    shopping bags and doing domestic chores.
In between the monologues, there were chants, murmurs, songs and 
    dancing to popular tunes such as ‘Tima na 
    money’ by Ray Mike Nwachukwu, ‘Suddenly’ by D’ Banj, and 
    ‘Face me I face you’ by Sunny Neji. And 
    the man behind the drums, Taiwo ‘Keleko’ Adesoji kept the tempo up with his drums.
O. C. Ukeje, the AMBO winner was particularly real 
    when he addressed the issue of erectile dysfunction and the 
    accompanying theatrics of what goes on between a man and woman 
    behind closed doors; the excuses of tiredness and stress. And with 
    poetic lines, he also wondered why, with over three billion women 
    in world, a man would take one by force. He had just one name for 
    such a man, "Bingo", a name synonymous with dogs in these 
    parts. His whistle as he said rang out loud and clear in the silent 
    hall and brought a convulsion of laughter among the audience. On 
    the stage, a solemn and booming voice stood out. It was Bimbo 
    Manuel, a well known actor conferring on him a veteran status 
    amongst other actors. Dressed in a suit, with a greying beard, and 
    a matching cane, he argued that older men could befriend much 
    younger women.
The monologues ended with the so-called ‘six myths 
    of marriage.’ Standing in a line, facing the 
    audience, Kenneth Uphopho who is also a dancer named each myth. The 
    last myth, according to him, was: "he would learn to speak up 
    to his mother after marriage." When he said this, members of 
    the cast just looked at each other as if wondering who it was 
    directed to, and burst out laughing. Tarzan 
    Monologues was like a reply to Vagina 
    Monologues which depicted how women feel the world.
