Beyond Nigerian nightmare
Yellow-Yellow
is the study of the aftermath of sexual escapades of white 
    expatriates in the oil-rich Niger Delta. Kids from such intercourse 
    often have to battle social stigma, they are generally regarded as 
    "African profit, born throw-ways as Ashawo 
    pikins, father unknown"; these are labels they carry 
    through life in a community that views them with suspicion.
The novel Yellow-Yellow opens with the 
    tragedy that has retributively become the Nigerian nightmare:
"During my second to last year in secondary school, one 
    crude oil pipe that ran through my village broke, spilled over 
    several hectares of land, my mother’s farm included… and so it was 
    that, in a single day, my mother lost her main source of 
    sustenance. However, I think she had lost that land a long time 
    ago, because each season yielded less than the season 
    before".
The novel is at once a story adventure of getting away and 
    becoming free from village entrapment or a bigger world, as it is 
    the story of adventure that ends in a misadventure, and what it 
    leaves in its wake, without forgetting the birth place of the story 
    in the Niger Delta.
It is the story of Zilayefa, better known as Yellow-Yellow, a 
    girl born out of a hit-and-run sexual escapade of a Greek father 
    whom the mother only knows by name and by no other claim than being 
    Greek. It is the story of how Zilayefa’s mother tries to ensure 
    that her daughter’s life does not take similar unfortunate path as 
    hers did and so everything is done to protect her. She does 
    everything to programme her 
    daughter for success through formal and informal education that had 
    eluded her. Unfortunately, away from her protective arm in Port 
    Harcourt, Zilayefa her daughter, who grew up through life on the 
    instruction of others, gets into the same ditch that her mother 
    wanted her to get away from. And she gets pregnant not for a 
    playboy white expatriate, but for a native sugar daddy, in whom she 
    sees a father that has eluded her all her life.
The story ends on Zilayefa’s unpersuasive resolution: "My 
    life is out of focus, and I wished for the days when mother planned 
    my life, but I could not go back to what I had rejected. I needed 
    to refocus, and this time I would have to do it myself. Everything 
    I had had in life up until that point had been handed to me on a 
    platter, and I had taken it all for granted ".
One major factor that makes Agary’s 
    Yellow-Yellow unique and peculiar is the way and 
    manner she portrayed women in the Niger Delta. Before now, youths, 
    especially the male folk, have been the ones crying out to the 
    Nigerian nation about their continued economic, socio and political 
    marginalisation. However, in this patricianly society, Agary in her 
    novel presents the Niger Delta women to us as the major victims of 
    the effects of oil exploitation in the region. To Agary, the 
    suffering is in two forms: the women suffer in the hands of the 
    foreign oil expatriates and in the hands of local men who 
    discriminate, subjugate and relegate them to the background.
In Yellow-Yellow, Kaine Agary presents to us 
    the current predicaments of women in the Niger Delta, how they are 
    treated negatively by human and environmental factors.
For the Niger Delta women, environmental sustainability is 
    fundamental to their overall well-being and development. The 
    environment is important to these women living in poverty not only 
    because their existence to a large extent relies on 
    substancial endeavours, 
    which depend on natural resources, but also they perceive that 
    their well being is tied to their environment in terms of 
    livelihoods, health, vulnerability and the ability to control their 
    lives. These poor women are more vulnerable to the changes in the 
    environment, in part because social, political and economic 
    exclusion means they almost have fewer choices about where they 
    live. In Yellow-Yellow, women bear the brunt of natural hazards, 
    biodiversity loss and the depletion of forests, pollution (air, 
    water and soil), and the negative impacts of industrial activities. 
    Zilayefa laments that:
The day my mother’s farmland was overrun by crude oil was the 
    day her dream for me started to wither… the black oil that spilled 
    that day swallowed my mother’s crops and unraveled the treads that 
    held together her fantasies for me.
In the novel, Agary portrays women as not having any option but 
    to sell their bodies to men especially the foreign oil expatriates 
    who use young ladies as nothing but sex bags:
I could find my way to a place like Bonny, the base of 
    expatriates working for the oil companies, and sell my body to a 
    whitey. Some girls from my town did that in order to send money 
    home to their families.
Even when they are lucky enough to find a mistress: "
    the mistress would beat them daily, 
    deny them food, and after years of service send them back to the 
    village without having improved their lives, as promised". At 
    home, men expect the women to suffer and cater for the basic needs 
    of the family. The woman is oppressed when she fails to do this
    :
The men were even more oppressive than the women alive could 
    remember. They demanded a healthy meal when they were hungry, 
    disregarding the fact that the women had to walk extra kilometers 
    to get firewood or cultivate and harvest the food now fertilized by 
    their sweat and blood. More so, at home and at the communal levels 
    the women are discriminated. They are not allowed to participate or 
    contribute to societal issues even if it concerns them or not
    :
The men claimed that, according to tradition, it was their 
    exclusive right to make all the decisions inside and outside the 
    home… they drew the line of women particularly in communal meetings 
    on serious town issues. This discrimination or denial is born of 
    the idea and fear that women if given the chance, "would want 
    to mount to their men in the bedroom." Therefore, they believe 
    that "no real man could accept that. It just wasn’t 
    done!" This discrimination did not exist at the communal level 
    alone, in home economics, the men never allowed the women to decide 
    or contribute on how money should be spent. Those women who dared 
    were beaten heavily. Kaine Agary writes that "some women 
    walked around deaf in one ear because they had dared to question 
    their husband’s wisdom in spending the last 
    kobo in the house on booze".
However, what these men failed to understand in the view of many 
    feminists like Agary is that, "the woman came from the man’s 
    rib, not from his feet to be walked on; not from his head to be 
    superior, but from his side to be equal" (Barack Obama)
    
Spiritually, the women suffer discrimination; they are often 
    called or labeled witches just because of their appearance. Agary 
    laments that "women with distended bellies that resembled 
    pregnancies, caused by urine fibroids, were confined to their rooms 
    because a diviner [who is probably a male] had investigated and 
    confirmed them to be witches". Just like Anthol Fugard’s Sizwe 
    Banzi is Dead, Agary in Yellow-Yellow present to us another form of 
    racial discrimination against coloured women who are of mixed 
    parentage in the Niger Delta. Zilayefa laments that: In Port 
    Harcourt being yellow defined my interactions with the people I 
    met…. I came to understand that people had preconceived notions 
    about others of mixed race they thought we were promiscuous, 
    undisciplined, and confused.
The point Agary holds is that, since it takes two: the union of 
    male and female to give birth to a child, two of them should also 
    shame the liabilities. However, what is done in the Niger Delta is 
    that; these men who comes from far, like Zilayefa’s father, 
    impregnate the women and run away, they leave the women to suffer 
    the share alone. Zilayefa asserts that.
Oil wealth encourages men in the region to take advantage of 
    their perceived economic buoyancy by engaging in sexual intercourse 
    with many girls, often without protection. The UNDP Niger Delta 
    Human Development Report asserts that "it is common thing in 
    Port Harcourt, Warri and other places here. It is difficult to find 
    a married man who does not have girl friends outside". The 
    delta’s oil economy has generated severed moral contradictions by 
    creating a class of rich who flaunt their wealth, seduce improvised 
    adolescent girls and gain access to an extensive network of female 
    sexual partners. Agary portrays more on this point using the 
    character of Admiral who fell in love with Zilayefa and impregnated 
    her. In the ongoing debate about the Niger Delta region significant 
    emphasis has been placed on the devastation of the environment and 
    ecological balance by oil and gas exploitation, as well as other 
    industrial activities. Agary believes strongly that the 
    environmental predicament contributes to social and economic 
    deprivation, further complicating the development situation of 
    women in the region. The issue at stake includes urbanisation, 
    occupational changes, the loss of fishing grounds, the 
    disappearance of livelihoods and land shortages, among others. 
    These changes have in turn threatened cultures, traditional systems 
    and values, and the authority structure in the region. In addition, 
    poverty has become a way of life for the women due to economic 
    stagnation, unemployment, poor quality of life due to shortage of 
    essential goods and facilities, an unhealthy environment and 
    government insensivity.
In conclusion, Kaine Agary’s novel, has taken our attention away 
    from the stories of militancy and violence, and in turn focus our 
    mind on the life of the ordinary woman in the Niger Delta, someone 
    just trying to survive the economics, the physical environment and 
    the politics of the Niger Delta. She however suggests that if women 
    are given the opportunity they will do better in contributing to 
    the growth and development of the area. She proves this point using 
    the character of Sisi and Lolo who through creativity and hard work 
    are able to acquire great wealth for themselves despite their level 
    of education. Unlike Admiral who used his wealth to entice ladies; 
    Lolo and Sisi used their wealth in human development. They adopted 
    and brought up Zilayefa as if she is their relative and Sisi 
    employed Clara as a sales girl in her shop. Finally, Agary’s novel 
    has opened our eyes to see how women in the Niger Delta are 
    discriminated on the part of the local men and white men who use 
    women as nothing but sexual machines and objects money can buy. 
    Women in this region should therefore be given their God given 
    opportunity, so that they can utilise their potentials and 
    contribute to the growth and development of the region.
