A wonderful linkage
This book written and edited by Bukonla Akinwade does precisely 
    what it proclaims in its title: It offers a window into what should 
    be the right of way for a growing man, it provides answer to a 
    quest for excellent life while advising on confidence building and 
    good character as a definite way to an exemplary life.
What is more remarkable in the account is the diligent manner in 
    which the author has used different subjects as a platform for 
    commenting on her recommended personalities for a successful life. 
    It becomes more re-assuring as the author weaves everyday story on 
    the paved and dusty streets of Nigerian communities as a magic 
    potion for confidence building.
The linkage of social and spiritual lifestyle with biblical 
    references without losing its real focus and intended message in an 
    engaging prose as done by the author makes Young and Confident a 
    distinguished book from the rest.
With a foreward by Professor 
    Michael Omolewa, Nigeria’s ambassador and permanent delegate to 
    UNESCO, the book in its eleven chapters focuses on building a great 
    and progressive society by impacting the reader with requisite for 
    first-rate personality.
The book is a collection of materials from the author’s archive 
    as a columnist with Redemption Light, the official magazine of the 
    Redeemed Christian Church of God, dubbed as a fast growing 
    Pentecostal Church in the world.
In his foreword, Professor Omolewa notes that, 
    The tone of the book is generally 
    confidence building, In chapter 2 the 
    author explores positive relationship between Paul and Timothy to 
    make impression on the reader as a window into what should define a 
    relationship- a desire 
    for greatness and a companionship that is altruistic, optimistic 
    and progressive.
In chapter 3, the author is no longer at ease with her creative 
    prowess when she made known the purpose of this book by singing the 
    song of Christy Lane, "One day at a time". She had reeled 
    out the story of a young banker who committed suicide in his prime. 
    The author draws a lesson from Dr. Myles Munroe speeches:
"It was Dr. Myles Munroe who said that the best 
    brains, unfulfilled dreams, untapped talents and many good things 
    one can think of, are in the grave. I mean that banker could easily 
    be said to be one of the best brains in town but he died without 
    being fulfilled. All the innovations he would have brought to the 
    banking profession, all the fatherly love, direction, care etc he 
    would have given to his children all perished the day he took his 
    life. He died with all the untapped talents in him. That man did 
    not die empty after all, because he never utilized all that he had 
    before he took his own life."
She thereafter opened the curtain by explaining what it means to 
    die empty.
"This simply means living a self-less life, in which you do 
    not have anything to keep back but you are always ready to give 
    your all any day and any time. So that the day one has to go to the 
    great beyond, there will be nothing left."
The author seems to be in a hurry to get through this particular 
    chapter as she is silent about people who actually died empty in 
    reference to the definition she gave to encourage its readers. But 
    it would have been particularly useful to give account of those who 
    left the shore of the world to a destined haven with a life still 
    being celebrated today, even after their departure. A chronology 
    into their contribution to lives of individuals, community and 
    nations would have given more courage to the reader in a quest for 
    excellent life.
The use of allegory in story telling is one good means the 
    author employed from the beginning to the end of the chapter and 
    this will in no small measure allure even impassive readers while 
    making the book a must for habitual readers.
Though it is particularly written for young minds, people from 
    all walks of life irrespective of age, race and creed will find 
    inspiration in this book. Mentors and leaders will find this book 
    useful as a tool in their daily engagements. Without doubt the 
    publication of this collection is a worthy initiative and I in 
    particular find it a contribution to nation building.
