The new Gani
Everyman has a story to tell. While some stories are filthy 
    secrets, others may be exciting captivating, educative, chilling 
    intriguing and mind boggling. Stories can be fiction, non-fiction. 
    But where stories are non – 
    fiction or deal with real characters, most of who are alive 
    as the case in the book PRISONER J. 60 – The Legal struggles 
    of Gani Fawehinmi and what it means for all of us, one will no 
    doubt be tempted to read historical account of certain characters 
    who have not only walked through this earth, but who have led his 
    country as conquerors, carpetbaggers, conquistadors and soldiers of 
    fortune and civilian primitive capitalists.
Before going deep into the review of this book; it is pertinent 
    to mention that humans, by nature can fall into sin at some 
    scandalous moments. These scandalous moments can be traced to the 
    Garden of Eden where God asked Adam; where art thou? 
    Or when God asked Cain: where is Abel after Cain had killed 
    his brother? Let us bear in mind that it’s not that God did 
    not have answers to these questions. He was trying to emphasize the 
    fact that man has failed Him! While we are not here for sermons as 
    the author of this book does on Sundays, I informed him for the 
    first time since we knew each other professionally that I used to 
    listen to his father’s sermons every Sunday when I was a kid. This 
    is by the way. The fact as we know it is that laws had been handed 
    down from creation through Biblical to modern times. The ability to 
    make mistakes, correct them and avoid sin is what keeps the society 
    intact. A society that shies away from history and the rule of law 
    will end up dancing hip hop in the face of threats from rap artists 
    and militants.
When society refuses to abide by the rule of law, it slides into 
    Stone Age and a loss of identity with her youths. The rule of the 
    jungle – the dog eat dog scenario which late Ken Saro – Wiwa once 
    described Nigeria will then be the norm. In the preface to the 
    book; Scandal, published in 1988 by Christine Keeler, the girl that 
    was entwined with John Profumo, the British Minister and Eugene 
    Ivanov, Russian spy and M15 ( the secret service) the lady 
    retorted: "Here is the truth at last!" One 
    can sum up the book: Prisoner J. 60 as the truth at last! 
    What is J. 60? Let us start from here. That was the prison’s 
    number given to the legal luminary and radical lawyer who is being 
    honoured with this book when he was wrongly imprisoned while 
    seeking justice in the battle to unravel the mystery question: who 
    killed Dele Giwa, his client and friend?
This book is dedicated to late Professor Ayodele Awojobi who 
    Akinnola describes as "the forgotten Consummate 
    Litigant." Who was Ayodele Awojobi? Awojobi was a Professor of 
    Mechanical Engineering who sued the corrupt and inept regime of 
    Shehu Shagari more than ten times within two years. In the book: 
    Candid Reflections: Reminiscences of a medical doctor, pathologist, 
    evangelist and administrator by Dr. I.M Malomo, 
    Awojobi was described by his peers as a genius.
Like Gani Fawehinmi, Awojobi was in and out of court many times 
    to drive home his point against corrupt politicians. Some members 
    of the ruling class dubbed this type of attitude of "taking 
    them to court over several issues as nuisance value. It was 
    fashionable to hear them comment on ‘Gani’s nuisance 
    value." Most geniuses were often thought to be nuisances. 
    There was a time Wole Soyinka was thought to be a nuisance. But 
    when he won the Nobel, these groups of people ate their words. 
    Those who called Gani a nuisance for suing the government in 
    Nigeria would have wondered why with his enormous hard earned 
    resources he did not join them to scavenge the oil waste dump that 
    they have turned the country into. They could have wondered why 
    Gani chose as Akinnola tagged it in the first chapter of the book 
    the path of; "Ganicidal Combative Advocacy." For a lay 
    man who is not learned like me, I think there is a correlation 
    between law/order and common sense. There is a relationship between 
    logic/reasoning.
Where there is no law, there is no sin as the saying goes. Where 
    there is no law, there should be common sense. And I think this is 
    what drives the so called radicals whether in the legal profession 
    or other calling. The truth is: can you write the story of Nigeria 
    without mentioning the activities of Gani? Can you write the story 
    of military regimes in Africa without mentioning the name of this 
    lawyer who was never a soldier? But he was combative in his use of 
    law and this you will read in the book spanning 234 pages.
Chapter one of the book chronicles those cases based on the 
    point of law that Gani had against brutal regimes. It highlighted 
    the story of Mr. Minere Amakiri, who was the Rivers State 
    correspondent of the Observer newspaper owned by the Mid-Western 
    State government. That was heart of the state where our own 
    Comrade, His Excellency, Adams Oshiomole now rules. Mr. 
    Amakiri had reported teacher’s grievances in the Observer of July 
    30, 1973.
That day coincided with the birthday of Naval Commander Alfred 
    Diette Spiff – now a traditional ruler in Niger Delta. The 
    governor’s ADC Ralph Iwowari who was furious ordered the reporter 
    to be given 24 strokes of the cane. Amakiri’s head was shaved with 
    an old blade and detained. Gani took up the case and he won. 
    Details of the case, conversation between the brutal ADC and 
    Amakiri are published. The author also gives insight into long 
    forgotten landmark cases such as; 
    the release of Dr. Edwin Madunagu who was a mathematics 
    lecturer at University of Lagos. (He is now on the Board of The 
    Guardian newspapers), the defence of University of Ibadan students 
    before the Justice Kassim Commission of Inquiry over the killing of 
    Adekunle Adepeju. There were several other cases handled by Gani to 
    defend the oppressed, including; 
    Alozie Ogugbuaja, the controversial police officer, rusticated 
    students of the University of Maiduguri. One of them who later 
    became a medical doctor divinely saved Gani’s life when he was 
    detained in Maiduguri. From the first chapter, the author holds the 
    reader spell bound with story of the lawyer, Gani who the 
    authorities accused in 1978 of "stealing his own camera" 
    and also "attempting to burn his own house to embarrass the 
    government." This reminds one of the illogical arguments of 
    the successive governments in the country who in 1990 accused an 
    oil rich community called Umuenchen in River state of "burning 
    down their own houses" as they fled away when police invaded 
    the town and killed their traditional ruler.
Chapter two is titled; Let there be 
    more political Parities. It 
    brings out depth of a legal luminary who believes more in the use 
    of law, brain, commonsense rather than brawn and brutality in 
    government.
The chapter recalls why Nigeria now has many parties when prior 
    to 2002 the country had three political 
    parities. The author reminds us it was Gani who spotted the 
    loopholes in INEC’s guidelines which contradict the constitution. 
    The suit and names of 27 litigants who led by Gani sued INEC and 
    Attorney – General of the federation with their organisations, 
    summons, Questions, claims, affidavit are in this chapter. Gani we 
    are reminded brought out the contradiction between INEC rules and 
    the constitution and fought for more parties to the Supreme Court 
    level. Lawyer, politicians and the general public will find this 
    chapter very educative. If not for Gani, some of our governors 
    today would probable have not made it to the state house. The third 
    chapter is titled; Gani vs F.R.A. Williams – Between the activist and the 
    positivist legal prism.
Here, the author reminds us of the remark by Lord Denning who 
    noted that "when you set on this road, you must 
    remember that there are two great objects to be achieved, one is to 
    see that the laws are just, the other that they are justly 
    administered." Let me ask before going deep into this 
    chapter; how many legal practitioners or judges in our country 
    follow this rule to see that laws are just? Were the obnoxious laws 
    under the military drafted by soldiers alone? Or by reporters or 
    laymen like me?
There are several practitioners who we are made to believe want 
    to feed fat on their clients. The author tells us the story of a 
    lawyer – Hogan who tells his friend he wanted "a very rich 
    man, very solvent, walking up to my door in a very great deal of 
    trouble." First Akinnola tells us in the chapter that F.R.A. Williams would prefer to go for the big brief 
    even if a number of people feel that it is a against public 
    interest and social justice."
The author writes; "He was mechanical in his approach. And 
    that is where the gulf stands between him and Gani, who rather sees 
    the social justice end of an issue, particularly where the 
    oppressed are concerned. "There has been no love lost between 
    the due (Gani and FRA Williams)," writes Akinnola who 
    chronicles the "professional animosity" between the two 
    legal giants. Gani used to chide Williams for making circuitous 
    voyage round the globe to cite cases.
"Why go to India he would ask "when there are enough 
    cases in the supreme court that can be used." Chief Williams 
    too would chip in to the judges when Gani addressed them; we know 
    he’s not talking to your Lordship. He is talking to his friends 
    (pointing to the press gallery)."
I know that this has been one of Fela Anikulapo’s quarrels with 
    the judiciary in those days as he used to say: " 
    how den go go cite case 
    for Nothinghillgate England to jail somebody wey thief something 
    for Lagos."
Apart from highlighting the drama between Gani and FRA, the 
    author also delves into archives and unearths why The Guardian 
    newspaper shifted from it’s "simply Mr. Policy" 
    which was used to address everyone at inception. Akinnola who was 
    the newspaper’s judicial correspondent who had to report the trail 
    of Tunde Thompson and Nduka Irabor – two journalists under Decree 
    No 4 of 1984 recalls why he began to use the prefix 
    "Chief" for Williams in his subsequent reports."
The climax of the clash between Gani and FRA is treated in 
    details with the author’s blow by blow account of how Gani dug up 
    an old unknown case where a judge said in 1949 that the renowned 
    FRA in "had no regulation to protect". FRA had sued 
    Newswatch for alleged libel on the "simply Mr. 
    Story." Gani took up the gauntlet and confronted FRA. Chapter 
    four of the book is on the NBA challenge. The author reminds us 
    that at a time, Gani was almost "de 
    robed" by the legal practitioner’s disciplinary 
    committee over alleged advertisement. He also had a clash with the 
    NBA over a boycott order issued by the association on "all 
    lawyers appearing before Decree 3 Tribunal) Recovery of public 
    property (Special Military Tribunals of 1984. Gani appeared before 
    the Tribunal and dared the NBA. The author recalls how Gani’s two 
    aides dragged a big blue Portmanteau containing law books to court 
    to argue before Mr. Justice Cardide Ademola Johnson. This 
    book for the first time reveals the secret communication between 
    former Chief Justice of Nigeria, Sir Adetokunbo Ademola, Gani and 
    his adversaries and the attempt to settle out of court.
The entire position of Gani and his opponents are documented. 
    More importantly, the publication of the General Council of the 
    Bar’s general meeting held in Lagos on 25th November, 1966 where it 
    made "52 Rules of professional" Conduct in the legal 
    profession" can be found in the book. Among the rules is that 
    ; it is the right of the lawyer to 
    undertake the defence of a person accused of a crime, regardless of 
    his personal opinion as to the guilt of the accused otherwise 
    innocent persons etc. With logic and commonsense, Gani brought out 
    the illogicality and double standard of the NBA through the General 
    Council’s documented meeting. Read Gani’s reasonable stand on page 
    90 of Akinnola’s book; the timid and 
    timorous Bar is afraid to raise a query against the Chief Justice 
    of Nigeria who swore in all members of the Tribunals.
He cited many fundamental cases and advocated legal changes 
    wondering why the Bar had been docile. These cases are ingredients 
    and tools which students of law, lawyers, and researchers can even 
    avail themselves with for survival in perilous times. From the 
    submission of Gani on page 97, he appears to have roped in those 
    who wanted to persecute and prosecute him for appearing before the 
    Military Tribunal by saying, "the prosecution council in these 
    Tribunals are members of the bar. The judges in these Tribunals are 
    themselves lawyers. The Attorney – General of the Federation is the 
    Head of the bar and he drafted the Decrees. Yet in its morbid and 
    insensate hypocrisy, schizophrenic and chameleonic, diddling, 
    sizzling and wangling The Nigerian Bar Association has no complaint 
    against the Chief Justice, the Attorney – General, the Judges who 
    are members of the tribunals and the prosecutors. Gani had always 
    used commonsense and logic including public opinion to ridicule 
    this opponents. He demonstrates this in the Saro-Wiwa trial in 
    chapter five. When Ken Saro – Wiwa (see page 17, African Concord of 
    November 18, 1996. As if he has seen the future, Saro Wiwa noted 
    that Nigeria is a wicked nation – a dog eats dog society adding 
    that "this is no country. This is not a fair country. Even if 
    I were to die tomorrow, you cannot destroy an idea like mine." 
    Ken had not even been arrested then. When you read in Akinnola’s 
    book that the Chief Justice of the Federal High court where the 
    judge who presided over Ken’s trial was drafted said he had no idea 
    of what was going on, and that his court had nothing to do with the 
    trial and that it’s a presidency affair, you then begin to wonder 
    whether justice truly resides in Nigeria. The author in Prisoner 
    J. 60 recalls the confrontation between Lt. Col Paul 
    Okutimo who was in charge of security at Ogonni, the secret roles 
    of Shell ( later charged in a US 
    court and who has now agreed to compensate the families of 
    those" killed in 
    the name of the law" or judiciary you now realise that 
    somehow, it takes a foreign court to teach us commonsense, logic or 
    reason fifteen years after. By the way, maybe if we rule with more 
    commonsense, Obama would have visited Nigeria!
