Mantras of a kind
This is, no doubt, the period of harvests of poetry in Nigeria. 
    Everywhere you look in the literary landscape of the country; it is 
    collection of poetry by both old and young authors. Then the 
    question you are tempted to ask is: are these works of good 
    standard and quality? Do they really meet the required conditions 
    to be called good poetry? As it is however, some have been able to 
    address and tackle myriad of problems that confront the nation, 
    telling the public that a lot have really gone wrong with the 
    entity called Nigeria.
Ayeba Biobazagha is one of such poets. With his latest 
    collection of poems entitled Mantras for Wagibote he zeroes down on 
    the many issues of concern for the nation. Some of the lines are 
    sober and reflective, while others are hard and deep with strong 
    words etched on the tombstone of a sick society. He carefully 
    dwells on what he termed Penitent, Pilgrimage, Songs of sorrow, 
    Solomon, Find in you, Mantras of the Delta and so on. These lines 
    say so much about human existence, about human relations and 
    feelings, about how a people have derailed over the years and what 
    can be done to re-establish some level of reasonability in the 
    minds of the people.
In Songs of sorrow, the poet bemoans – You brought me the first 
    insight/ On the perception of death/To know the belabours of 
    sorrow/That strangles the insomniac mind/Always recasting model 
    memories/That marshal in a chronicle of tears…
Watching your brief traverse /I wish I could pause, wind back/ 
    And play again This scene is/Reminiscing I wish I could pause/Wind 
    back and play again this scene/Preventing your brief traverse.
No doubt, love and sorrow and regret span the length and 
    breath of the book. Wangibote is 
    an Ogbanje – born to die 
    baby.In love and sorrow the 
    poet loses her in an unfortunate way and then begins to remonstrate 
    and fret and bemoan death – indeed life itself. However he 
    overplays it, for soon you discover that the mantras is totally for 
    Wangibote. No other issue or problem matters or even deserves a 
    mention.
Of course, most of the lines talk about love long gone 
    soar as the poet rummages through 
    the journey of life. The imagery may not be that strong in 
    conveying some of the elements of sorrow and regrets, yet, the poet 
    has been able to bring out some elements of love feeling of a man 
    long demented or denied of love. Says the poet in Eve, I love the 
    way you are shaped/Like a pear fruit curved/Two legs to carry your 
    poise ]Two hands to hold me close/A 
    head to place on my shoulder/You want me ever needing you/You are a 
    thermostat/For manifesting emotions…
He goes on to demonstrate in the Mantras of the Delta the 
    implications of amnesty, of the lopsided development in the area 
    and the sins of those who constitute the menace in the area. He 
    goes on to state that until the human suffering there in the Delta 
    is totally eliminated or curtailed, kidnapping, bad blood, hate, 
    joblessness, idleness, et al, will continue to haunt the people. 
    Then the issue of oil will still remain a thorny one in the history 
    of Nigeria. This is indeed the Mantras of the Delta where pollution 
    and acrimony have taken the place of love and orderliness.
Some of the lines go this way: For dream huntsmen/Laud 
    drumbeat/Four tribesmen matched against nine/Accusers and 
    accusations/Vultures and hyenas/ Ready for the feast of/Carcasses 
    from a dark goggled beast…/They only dreamed until/These 
    philosophies of deprivation/There grime fingers choking/Awakening 
    horrendously:/ This gospel is the creator/Of dictators, for baited 
    sharks.
Of course it is the role of leaders to be in control of the fate 
    of the people in their nation. But where they have chosen to be 
    hawks and sharks, the ship of leadership will continue to derail . 
    This is the whole import of the imageries used in these lines which 
    do not spare the nations total reliance on oil. Leaders have to sit 
    up so as to make the people see the values of leadership and what 
    the people can gain from the abundance of resources of the 
    nation.
So, it is like Nigeria is Wagibote, the notorious born to die 
    baby. He goes and comes back into the world in a new form. 
    Nigeria’s problems are indelible, they disappear to reappear in new 
    forms, more reinforced .
