Tragic tendencies
Tragedy, to the theatre is like what the soul and the heart are 
    to the body. In almost all aspects of theatre, tragedy holds the 
    soul of the audience. At every point of a stage performance, the 
    audience deliberately look out for those elements that strike them 
    most. In this case, what comes to mind is: How does a playwright 
    treat a hero? What is the place of a hero especially a historical 
    figure in a play that chronicles his escapades?
In all these, it all depends on how a playwright has taken his 
    time to handle the subject matter. In his latest book entitled 
    Discourse on Tragedy, Ahmed Yerima carefully delves into all 
    aspects of tragedy. What constitutes a tragic play? Why must a 
    figure push himself to the point of taking his life in order to 
    prove that he is a hero? At the beginning of the book, Yerima seems 
    to be incoherent using so many sources and references that do not 
    really synchronise with his argument.
But then in theatre tradition, tragedy is the most heated 
    aspect, or, if you like, the centrepiece of this profession. This 
    is why Yerima actually takes enough time to zero down on the issues 
    that effectively constitute a tragedy. He takes his time to look at 
    all aspects and components of other books done not only by Nigerian 
    playwrights such as Wole Soyinka, Ola Rotimi, Olu Obafemi, Zulu 
    Sofola, Femi Osofisan, but also other foreign ones like William 
    Shakespeare, Aristotle, Brecht and so on.
At each point of this discourse, Yerima brings the views of 
    these people into focus, using them to further throw more light on 
    this subject matter. In the first place, is it what really 
    constitutes a tragedy in Europe or America that constitutes the 
    same here in Africa? Why is it that the African audience rather 
    than mourn, applaud and appraise a tragic hero and all the symbols 
    he represents in a play?
To all these, the author himself, a renowned writer and 
    dramatist proffers all the answers. On page 15 where he begins his 
    presentation in a subtle form. This is deliberate somewhat in order 
    to bring the audience into the ambience of this discourse. Yerima 
    says ‘I believe that African drama has its roots in the traditional 
    story-telling, folk poetry, dances, singing, folk stories, and 
    mythic traditions’. This, in other words, helps to form the basic 
    components of the African concept of tragedy. For every African, 
    there’s always a story to tell – stories of heroes and heroines who 
    have done one or two things to move or to effect the society and 
    the people. This is the point from where these elements of tragedy 
    are drawn. No one can wish away the people’s resort to issues of 
    history or tradition that inform the sole source of their tragic 
    heroes and heroines.
Yerima is also careful not to conclude or claim that it is the 
    same component bodies that dictate heroes in Europe that also do so 
    here. But in all, he makes some certain concessions – that a 
    historic play most often claims the life of its hero either here in 
    Africa or elsewhere.
“Aristotle”, Yerima says, “who is the father of intellectual 
    drama also notes that tragedy is a play about a man that is good 
    and of royal birth who, through his flaws, falls from grace to 
    grass. And his fall which must be a reversal of his fortune must 
    evoke pity and fear from the audience”
Indeed in his own words, Aristotle, in his great theatrical 
    wisdom says “tragedy, however, is an imitation not only 
    complete but also of incidents that arouse pity and fear”. 
    But even in some cases, before a play commences, the hero has 
    already become a victim. This goes to show the passion the audience 
    attach to tragedy and how powerful it evokes emotion while it is on 
    stage.
Plays are incomplete without the driving force of tragedy. For 
    that is what theatre in its entirety embodies. The book is clear in 
    all the salient points that make playwrights choose what they must 
    to make their plays remarkable. The big role the gods constantly 
    play to influence the lives of Africans also come into play here. 
    Inside all these however, are embedded the role of folk heroes, 
    people who had often come up to lead the people, to show them the 
    way forward.
But somewhere along the line, there may be a slip which leads to 
    catastrophic end. This is the point at which tragedy begins to 
    command repulsive attention or acclaim depending on the make of the 
    audience.
On page 61, Yerima posits why this can often be taken to be the 
    correct position. Says he, “in most dramatic tragedies, the 
    protagonist is a leader who falls by the 
    way side because of his confrontation either with the gods 
    or man. As a leader, he is the one who initiates action, even 
    though the action revolves around him, gives orders, even though 
    the orders may work against him, makes decisions that may be 
    against him, settles disputes, even when his life, downfall or 
    reversal of fortunes may be the only way the dispute or conflict of 
    the play can be resolved” 
Indeed, taken further than this in the words of two great 
    psychologists, McCrae and Costa, a tragic hero often has some level 
    of neurotic tendencies in him. Both say – neuroticism – anxiety, 
    anger, hostility, depression, self-consciousness, impulsiveness, 
    vulnerability, with all these why wouldn’t a hero fall victim of 
    the circumstances which he finds himself? This is the main point of 
    heroic tragedy that also defines the whole issues so entrenched in 
    a play. Here, the case of Kurunmi of Ijaye and Odewale in Ola 
    Rotimi’s The gods are not to Blame comes to mind.
The book is apt for those who have the patience and love to 
    study theatre. It’s also good not just for practitioners but also 
    for all the people involved in the affairs of writing, teaching and 
    presenting theatre as a profession. It is not one of those flimsy 
    books one reads in passing or in a hurry. This is an academic 
    discourse, pure and simple. It is one book that points the way 
    forward on how to handle and generally understand and appreciate 
    tragedy in and out of stage.
