Between museum and public
Until very recently, museum contents were largely information 
    based with dates, places and facts serving as the norms. But 
    curators have now began experimenting with new ways of presenting 
    collections that they hoped, would more effectively reach their 
    target audience.
Director of Network Museums, John Cotton Dana, observed that 
    more important to what are displayed in museums is how it was used. 
    He established many common practices to increase the museum’s 
    usefulness, through loaning objects to school classrooms, shops, 
    hospitals, creating a teacher-training course at local college, 
    opening a junior museum for the children only and establishing 
    branch museums in local libraries.
In the past, museums in Nigeria sat and waited for the public to 
    come visiting. Such visits were usually conducted by museum 
    education officers, who took visitors, who are often times passive 
    listeners, round the galleries. This practice did not help in the 
    effective interpretation of objects and did not give room for 
    public active participation in museum matters.
The museum in Nigeria is no longer sacred or untouchables, 
    rather, the museum is open to scrutiny, for within its walls and 
    from an increasingly discriminately public. The process of 
    rethinking the museum has brought intense examination of values and 
    assumptions and the scope and nature of services offered.
At the heart of this new trend is the desire by museum 
    professionals to position the museum to be relevant and to provide 
    the best in society, that is, to teach and advertise. This has of 
    necessity made some museums in Nigeria, with Lagos Museum taking 
    the lead begin to form an alliance with several teaching agencies, 
    the public and private schools, the colleges and universities and 
    the art institutions.
In Nigeria, majority of museum visitors are school children and 
    university undergraduates. That is why some programmes are designed 
    to stimulate in the children, and adults alike, both intellectual 
    and cultural ideas that redefine some museum activities like 
    interpretation of objects and their significances, ethnic bias and 
    self identification.
The museum today involves the public in all its activities. In 
    the past, exhibitions were planned and executed by purely museum 
    professionals who select and mount objects. But quite recently 
    cooperate bodies, NGOs and the general publics have contributed to 
    the success of some museum exhibitions.
In Lagos museum, for instance, one of the temporary exhibitions 
    titled, All is not lost, is a product of 
    collaboration with the Ford Foundation.
The involvement of the public in museum matters has gone a long 
    way in bringing out the best in museum practices, especially the 
    selection of objects to be exhibited. Nigeria, being a 
    multi-cultural nation, has one of the greatest collections of 
    objects in the world. Some of the objects in the museums show the 
    similarities in the culture of Nigerian people, which is an 
    indication of brotherhood.
Theodore Low said it all when he wrote, "no one can 
    deny that museums have powers which are of the utmost importance in 
    any war of ideologies. They have power to make people see the 
    truth, the power to make people recognise the importance of 
    individuals as members of society, and of equal importance in 
    combating subversive inroads, the power to keep minds happy and 
    healthy…..Museums with their potentiality of reaching millions of 
    our citizens must not fail to recognise their 
    responsibility."
In conclusion, now that the museum has extended its hands for 
    public collaboration, the ball is now in the court of the public 
    who is expected to rise up to the challenges, so that the interest 
    of all will be taken care of.
