Artificial Oil/Condensate Spills and their Impact on the 
    Environment
Man and his environment are two inseparable items of discuss and 
    relation. Everything that has to do with the well being and 
    existence of man is encapsulated in his environment. So, the state 
    of the environment becomes a paramount issue to him, if he must 
    reap the natural benefits that are abound within such an 
    environment.
However, it is rather unfortunate that man in his bid to ensure 
    a modern life, has caused for 
    himself and others around him, 
    problems that are detrimental to the state of his environment, with 
    crude oil and condensate spills, that has now become a nightmare 
    for all at large.
Spills are basically caused by two major factors. The first 
     which is Equipment failure(s), can be 
    described as spills that occur as a result of aged pipelines and 
    manifolds. The fact is, these pipelines that are used by the oil 
    and gas industries do have a specific life-span, but negligently, 
    these pipelines are not replaced by the said oil/gas companies 
    after they must have served their durability and thereby making 
    them vulnerable or liable to burst, especially when the pressure of 
    mineral products passing through them are high. This is one problem 
    that is plagueing industries in the oil and gas sector, that is, 
    replacing these expired pipelines, some of which have not been 
    replaced for close to 30 years and more. But yet 
    , are still being used to transfer 
    petroleum and gas products.
The second aspect, which can be described as a thorn in the 
    flesh and a constant headache for both the state and Federal 
    Government and also the oil/gas multinationals, is the man-made 
    caused spills. This is the deliberate attempt to cut/drill holes on 
    product pipelines in order to siphon crude oil/condensate and in 
    the process, cause spills and fire 
    outbreaks or just deliberately cut the pipelines to cause spills. 
    Out of sheer greed, the people in the local communities connive and 
    collude with crude oil/condensate bunkerers to siphon these mineral 
    products by any means possible. The fact is, it is not possible for 
    total strangers to invade pipelines (usually running through the 
    communities) at night mostly to engage in these wicked clandestine 
    activities. These illegal bunkering activities have created a lot 
    of losses in oil and gas revenue and also 
    , the loss of lives, like the Jesse fire outbreak that 
    claimed close to 3,000 lives.
Another reason for pipeline vandalization is to draw the 
    attention of government and especially oil/gas multinational 
    companies and demand for compensation. They feel this is the only 
    way they can lay claims for oil/gas multinationals to provide 
    relief materials and compensation, 
    as a result of their exploration activities in the region. With 
    claims that such activities of the oil/gas companies have damaged 
    their environment and means of livelihood, like fishing and 
    agriculture, which are their mainstay. Again, the locals use this 
    means to create jobs for themselves. For instance, if oil/gas 
    companies like Shell (SPDC), wants 
    to clean these crude oil or condensate spills, they 
    will have to engage the services of community contractors who in 
    turn employ local hands to clean the environment. However, because 
    of the increasing spills, SPDC had to adopt the strategy of using 
    outside contractors, that is, contractors that are not from the 
    local area where the spills have taken place. It is only when the 
    spills are caused by equipment failure 
    , that the surrounding community contractors are used to 
    clean the spills.
But there is a clause to the whole arrangement, for instance 
    when outside or foreign contractors are engaged by SPDC to clean 
    the spills, the contractors are left with no choice but to engage 
    the community locals and these locals, dictate to 
    the contractors how much they are going to be paid and the number 
    of workers that should be employed. And most times, the communities 
    that cause these spills in the first place, allow it to 
    spread/affect a wide coverage area so as to extend the duration of 
    contract, where they will stand a chance of getting paid while it 
    last. So, one way or the other, the locals are employed by SPDC. 
    But is this the way to gain employment? Should we seek to get jobs 
    at the detriment of our environment?
It is rather painful and a pathetic situation, that someone will 
    deliberately and consciously damage his own environment in order to 
    get peanuts, ephemeral items out of greed, without any iota of 
    consideration of the negative impacts such acts will bring or cause 
    to his environment and health. They mutilate and self-inflict 
    themselves all in the name of trying to make quick money. And it is 
    rather unfortunate that community leaders are seriously involved in 
    these acts. Apart from using youths to achieve their selfish 
    desires, the barges of illegal bunkerers 
    , carrying crude oil or condensate along the creeks of 
    these communities are expected to settle or pay some money to these 
    community heads and youth leaders 
    , to allow a free passage.
Like the Utorogu/Ughelli Pumping Station (UPS) trunkline (16 
    inches pipeline), which we championed the advocacy for its 
    replacement, considering the fact that it was laid in the early 
    1960s, because of its constant leakages (as a result of old age), 
    that was finally replaced with new pipes in 2005 by Shell (SPDC), 
    after conducting a thorough Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA). 
    But within a span of two (2) years (2005/2007), there have cases of 
    over 48 holes (which have been clamped by SPDC) caused by illegal 
    bunkerers and others, yet to be discovered along the Utorogu/UPS 
    pipeline. One unfortunate thing about these vandalization 
    , is that whenever these pipelines 
    are vandalized, the Utorogu Gas Plant that supplies gas to power 
    stations, will have to be shut 
    down.
Recently there was a report in one of the nation's 
    newspapers about a looming nation 
    wide blackout (during the yuletide season) as a result of 
    inadequate gas supply to thermal power stations of the Power 
    Holding Company of Nigeria (PHCN), which has been cut off by the 
    activities of vandals. This latest development has effectively 
    reduced power generation by 1,150MW, leaving the national grid to 
    dispense nothing less than 2,000MW across competing demand centres 
    in the country. The activities of condensate bunkerers had created 
    repeated fire incidents on the 16 inches Utorogu/UPS trunkline 
    especially at the outskirts of Otor-Edo and Ughevwughe Communities 
    in Ughelli South Local Government Area of Delta State. The 
    consequence of this shut down 
    is a short fall of some 300 
    million standard cubic feet (scf) of gas to the national supply 
    grid and a consequent power outage across the country owing to the 
    inability of power generating plants to function optimally.
Before now, because of the increasing problems of pipeline 
    vandalization, Shell introduced the Community And Shell Together 
    (CAST) initiative in the West, which involves using the community 
    locals (that are familiar with the terrain) to monitor the 
    Utorogu/UPS pipeline. The Surveillance CAST initiative is to 
    checkmate the activities of illegal condensate bunkerers 
    , with the help of the Joint Task 
    Force (JTF). Though this very good CAST initiative has helped a 
    lot, but would have performed more effectively and efficiently 
    , if reports delivered to the 
    relevant Nigerian security operatives are taken seriously and 
    treated urgently.
The Nigerian factor is also not helping the already bad and 
    complicated situation, especially where the people that are 
    supposed to be of help and assistance, by virtue of their 
    positions, are now the ones orchestrating and aiding these illegal 
    condensate bunkering activities. We have heard of instances where 
    Presidents, Generals or Chairmen of Communities where these 
    condensate pipelines pass through engage in the very act of illegal 
    condensate bunkering, as chief bunkerers. The very same set of 
    people, go around, raise dust and 
    make so much noise about SPDC spills and degradation of the 
    environment. Some years back, a story was told about a lawyer in 
    one of the villages in Ughelli South, who sponsored some youths to 
    pour black substances that looked like crude oil in a particular 
    area near an SPDC well location and then turned around to claim for 
    damages and compensation from SPDC. But unknown to him, the area in 
    question was a dead-well and therefore cannot be producing crude 
    oil, not to mention causing a spill, it was Shell's 
    investigations that exposed this criminality. However, the 
    unfortunate thing is that, black substances used by 
    the lawyer have caused a serious damage to the environment. We ask, 
    must we use our own hands to destroy ourselves and the environment, 
    just because we want to get money? Should we carry out these 
    activities, oblivious of their repercussions and consequences, just 
    to satisfy self?
Apart from causing injurious activities on the physical 
    environment, through illegal crude 
    oil and condensate bunkering, and 
    pipelines and manifolds vandalization, which ultimately results to 
    spills (with regards to the spills caused by oil/gas companies due 
    to equipment failure, corrosion or human error), there is also the 
    aspect of restiveness in the region, caused by militants and the 
    misappropriation of public funds by our leaders in public offices. 
    All these prevailing circumstances will make it very difficult, if 
    not impossible, for the Niger Delta region to have sustainable 
    development which will ultimately affect the 
    whole country negatively.
The bottom line is that we are the architects of our own 
    misfortune, aggravating our already sub-human environment, making 
    life more unbearable for our people, children and future 
    generations, because of our greed, selfish aggrandizement and quest 
    for quick wealth that will never last long or used for anything 
    tangible. In as much as the government and oil/gas multinationals 
    have their own faults, much of the problems confronting us today in 
    the Niger Delta region, are caused by our own 
    brothers and sisters. Let us turn a new leaf, if we must make 
    progress, if not for anything, let it be for posterity sake. This 
    is our stand.
Zik Gbemre
National Coordinator
NIGER-DELTA PEACE COALITION
