Coughs Overview
A cough is an action your body takes to get rid of substances 
    that are irritating to your air passages, which carry the air you 
    breathe in from the nose and mouth to the lungs. A cough occurs 
    when special cells along the air passages get irritated and trigger 
    a chain of events. The result? Air in your lungs is forced out 
    under high pressure. You can choose to cough (a voluntary process), 
    or your body may cough on its own (an involuntary process).
Causes of Coughs
The list of possible causes of cough is long and highly varied. 
    Doctors classify coughs into 2 categories, acute and chronic. Many 
    doctors define an acute cough as one that been present for less 
    than 3 weeks. Chronic coughs are those present for more than 3 
    weeks.
Acute coughs can be divided into infectious (caused by an 
    infection) and noninfectious causes.
Infectious causes of acute cough include viral upper respiratory 
    infections (the common cold), sinus infections, pneumonia, and 
    whooping cough.
Noninfectious causes of cough include flare-ups of the following 
    chronic conditions: chronic bronchitis, emphysema, asthma, and 
    environmental allergies.
The easiest way to simplify the causes of chronic cough is to 
    divide them into their locations with respect to the lungs. The 
    categories are environmental irritants, conditions within the 
    lungs, conditions along the passages that transmit air from the 
    lungs to the environment, conditions within the chest cavity but 
    outside of the lungs, and digestive causes.
Any environmental substance that irritates the air passages or 
    the lungs is capable of producing a chronic cough with continued 
    exposure. Cigarette smoke is the most common cause of chronic 
    cough. Other cough-producing irritants include dusts, pollens, pet 
    dander, particulate matter, industrial chemicals and pollution, 
    cigar and pipe smoke, and low environmental humidity.
Within the lungs both common and uncommon conditions cause 
    chronic cough. Common causes include asthma, emphysema, and chronic 
    bronchitis. Less common causes of lung-induced chronic cough 
    include cancer, sarcoidosis, diseases of the lung tissue, and 
    congestive heart failure with chronic fluid build-up in the 
    lungs.
The passages that connect the lungs to the external environment 
    are known as the upper respiratory tract. Chronic sinus infections, 
    chronic postnasal drip, diseases of the external ear, infections of 
    the throat, and use of ACE inhibitors for high blood pressure have 
    all been implicated in chronic cough.
In addition to disease processes within the lung and air 
    passages, diseases elsewhere within the chest cavity may also be 
    responsible for chronic cough. Conditions within the chest known to 
    cause chronic cough include cancer, unusual growth of a lymph node, 
    and an abnormal enlargement of the aorta, which is the main blood 
    vessel leaving the heart.
An often-overlooked cause of the chronic cough is 
    gastroesophageal reflux (GERD). GERD occurs when acid from the 
    stomach travels up the esophagus. This abnormal condition can cause 
    irritation of the esophagus and larynx resulting in the reflex 
    production of a cough.
Cough Symptoms
Although the signs of a cough are self-explanatory, what 
    differentiates the cause of a cough are the associated signs and 
    symptoms. Another important factor in determining the cause of the 
    cough is whether it is acute or chronic.
•Acute coughs have been divided into infectious and 
    noninfectious causes.
•Signs and symptoms that point to an infection include fever, 
    chills, body aches, sore throat, nausea, vomiting, headache, sinus 
    pressure, runny nose, night sweats, and postnasal drip. Sputum, or 
    phlegm, sometimes indicates an infection is present, but it is also 
    seen in noninfectious causes.
• Signs and symptoms that point to a noninfectious cause include 
    coughs that occur when you are exposed to certain chemicals or 
    irritants in the environment, coughs with wheezing, coughs that 
    routinely worsen when you go to certain locations or do certain 
    activities, or coughs that improve with inhalers or allergy 
    medications.
•The signs and symptoms of the chronic cough can be hard for 
    doctors to assess, because many causes of the chronic cough have 
    overlapping signs and symptoms.
• If your cough is related to environmental irritants, it will 
    worsen when exposed to the offending agent. If you have an 
    environmental allergy, your cough may improve when using allergy 
    medications. If you have a smoker’s cough, it may improve if you 
    stop smoking and worsen with increased smoking.
