The Environmental Effects of (Excreted) 
    Pharmaceuticals
Concerns about the possible effects of pharmaceuticals, their 
    metabolites and other chemicals, including household products is 
    developing into a high profile issue in Europe, the United States, 
    Canada and other countries around the world. The presence of these 
    compounds and the inconsistencies in the way they are disposed has 
    made their presence in the environment inevitable.
After release into the environment, most pharmaceutically active 
    compounds (PhACs) also known as active pharmaceutical ingredients 
    (APIs) are eventually transported to the aqueous domain and are 
    expected to be only partially degraded and transformed into other 
    products by photo-transformative, physicochemical and biological 
    degradation reactions.
However evidence available now suggests otherwise. Every year 
    tonnes of these harmful chemicals 
    are emptied into rivers and other surface waters in the effluent 
    from sewage treatment plants since these plants generally are not 
    able to remove all trace constituents. Their sources in natural 
    waters are not limited to excretion of parent compounds and their 
    metabolites by individuals and pets but also include disposal of 
    unused medications to sewage systems, underground leakage from 
    sewage system infrastructures, release of treated or untreated 
    hospital wastes, disposal by pharmacies and physicians, and 
    humanitarian drug surplus to domestic sewage systems.
A recent study of three plant sites in India (Ankleshwar, 
    Nandesari & Vapi) by Greenpeace revealed that about 250-270 
    million liters of liquid and 100 million pounds of solid waste is 
    produced per day and per year respectively. About 19% of which is 
    from drugs and 5% from organic chemicals and 8% from pesticides. 
    Most of this is dumped into ground water and local water ways 
    surrounding the plants. Thus these water bodies now contain 
    poisonous chemicals such as benzene, 1,3- and 1,4-dichlorobenzenes. 
    Dichlorobenzene for instance is a persistent chemical substance 
    resistant to microbial degradation.
The presence of excreted pharmaceuticals and chemicals even at 
    low levels presents analytical challenges and the environmental 
    impact and public health effects of long-term, low-level exposure 
    and combinatory effects are potential detrimental to human health, 
    the environment and the flora and fauna. Consequently, it is 
    prudent to consider the options available to prevent excreted 
    pharmaceuticals and chemicals from getting into the environment and 
    reaching drinking water, surface waters such as rivers and lakes, 
    ground waters, and sediments. This will aid in forecasting their 
    potential long-term (chronic) effects on man, aquatic life and the 
    environment. The issue has become more pronounced due to increasing 
    concern as population density and consumption of 
    pharmaceuticals.
More worrying is the fact that pharmaceuticals in the 
    environment have become more persistent and even for compounds are 
    short life times, the effects of long-term exposure and combinatory 
    effects need to be addressed. Available literature suggests the 
    quantity of pharmaceuticals already excreted into the environment 
    is enormous; and will continue to increase as long as population 
    and pollution increase leading to a disruption of the delicate 
    balance of the ecosystem and environmental biomes, niches, food 
    chains, and the biodiversity of organisms therein.
The presence of pharmaceuticals such as antibiotics in the 
    aquatic environment poses a potential threat to ecosystem function 
    and human health. Scientific findings from research carried out at 
    Trent University Canada revealed that after a 100 day exposure of 
    Japanese Medakas fish to the effluent water samples with 
    concentrations of 0.1 ppt estrone (a type of estrogen) and 
    other chemicals, the fish began to exhibit intersexual changes 
    (showing both male and female characteristics). At 1000 ppt all the 
    males transformed to females.
Another study by researchers in London found that exposure an 
    even ppt of estrogen will trigger the production of Vitellogen, a 
    female protein responsible for making yolk in eggs, in male fish. 
    American researchers in a separate report found that the exposure 
    of excreted pharmaceuticals has resulted in the sterility of male 
    walleys, birth defects in alligators and also other water dwelling 
    birds and species of wildlife.
In humans the effects of excreted pharmaceuticals can be 
    attributed to cancers, hormonal imbalance, immune disabilities, 
    birth defects, cancer (carcinogenic), fetal deaths, decreased 
    fertility, male and female reproductive dysfunction and is known to 
    interfere with hormonal and endocrine systems such as those 
    responsible for insulin and thyroid hormones.
Some pundits may argue about whether or not there are adverse 
    human health effects from cumulative lifetime exposures to the low 
    concentrations and complex mixtures of pharmaceuticals. However, we 
    must not risk their effects, however mild, on sensitive 
    sub-populations such as children, women of child-bearing years, the 
    elderly, and people with suppressed immune systems; by making 
    rhetoric out of the problem like humanity has other issues like 
    global warming in the past.
In other to arrest these negative trends and forestall future 
    eventualities, the following measures can be employed to address 
    the situation. Because numerous studies reveal that majority of 
    pharmaceuticals in the environment come from patient use, 
    individuals must be cautioned on the effects of such actions on the 
    future of coming generations and the long term diversity protection 
    of the environment.
The government and NGOs must make concerted efforts to educate 
    people on the dangers of dumping pharmaceuticals into the 
    environment and encourage them to report if noticeable any change 
    in water or environment that can be attributed to the presence of 
    pharmaceuticals in the environment. The academia should be 
    stimulated by the government and proper environmental legislation 
    put in place to spur research and garner rigorous efforts towards 
    investigating the short and long term effects of pharmaceuticals 
    excreted into the environment.
Enacted legislation should be enforced more strongly to arrest 
    the unwanted and wanton disposal of pharmaceuticals, chemicals, 
    agricultural chemicals and pesticides into the streams, rivers and 
    water bodies by individuals and industry. A database-cum-databank 
    of research into pharmaceuticals excreted into the environment 
    should be created to enhance the knowledge base of the situation, 
    its effects and proffer solutions based on the twelve (12) 
    principles of Green Chemistry which include; Prevent Wastes, 
    Renewable materials, Omit derivatization steps, Degradable chemical 
    products, Use safe synthetic methods, Catalytic reagents, 
    Temperature, pressure ambient, In-process monitoring, Very few 
    auxiliary substances, E-factor, maximize feed in product, Low 
    toxicity of chemical products, Yes, it is safe.
Approval and incentives should be granted to firms and companies 
    who employ green technologies and techniques in pharmaceutical 
    waste disposal. Finally policy and technological framework 
    structures must be created to identify more potent pharmaceuticals 
    as the target of future research on possible effects of 
    pharmaceuticals in the environment.
This way mankind can take a huge step in the quest to be more 
    sustainable-responsible for her action towards the environment and 
    future generations.
