‘Arctic region holds third of world’s undiscovered gas 
    reserves’
The Arctic region may be storing 30 percent of the world’s 
    undiscovered natural gas reserves and most of them are in Russian 
    territory, an international team lead by the U.S. 
    Geological Survey (USGS) said last week.
This is the first-ever comprehensive assessment of undiscovered 
    oil and gas reserves within the Arctic Circle. Report about the 
    findings will appear in Friday’s edition of the journal Science.
According to the report, two-thirds of the undiscovered gas is 
    in just four areas - South Kara Sea, North Barents Basin, South 
    Barents Basin and the Alaska Platform. In fact, the South Kara Sea 
    off Siberia contains 39 per cent of the Arctic’s undiscovered 
    gas.
The report also estimated that the Arctic also contains three 
    percent to four per cent of the 
    world’s oil resources remaining to be discovered.
"It would not mean that there would be any kind of a 
    significant shift in global oil balance," said Donald 
    L. Gautier, lead author of the report. "But this is 
    especially significant for the Arctic nations."
Nations whose borders lie within the Arctic Circle are Canada, 
    Greenland/Denmark, Norway, Russia and the United States. Although 
    it’s closer to North America, Greenland is considered part of the 
    Kingdom of Denmark.
Using geological analysis and probability modeling, researchers 
    mapped out sedimentary rock deposits to estimate the amount of 
    undiscovered oil and gas beneath undersea continental shelves.
Researchers say that deep ocean basins have relatively low 
    petroleum potential, but the Arctic is one of the world’s largest 
    remaining areas where oil and gas are accessible. Most of the 
    reserves are projected to be in less than 500 metres of water - 
    roughly a third of a mile deep.
"Based on our study, there are 40 billion to 160 
    billion barrels of oil north of the Arctic Circle," 
    said Gautier, of the Geological Survey’s office in Menlo Park, 
    California. The USGS had previously estimated the Arctic is home to 
    90 billion barrels of oil.
The Energy Information Administration, a division of the 
    Department of Energy, estimates that the world currently uses 30 
    billion barrels of oil a year.
U.S. Geological Survey had also said that 
    Nigeria’s discovered and undiscovered gas reserves may be 600 
    trillion standard cubic feet (tscf). Currently, Nigeria’s gas 
    reserves is estimated at 187 tscf.
