Staphylococcus (VII)
My belief is that most of our men today are also in the same 
    situation as Mr. Peter and for one reason or the other 
    failed to seek help when necessary. If you are also having a 
    similar challenge, I call it a challenge because I believe it is 
    not a problem for God to use us to solve it. So, why don’t you give 
    it a trial and come to any of our offices nearest to you.
Staphylococcal infection does not cause infertility in men 
    alone, the women folks are not left out of this health menace, and 
    in fact I will like to say that women are the most affected gender 
    when it comes to staph infection. This is due to how wonderfully 
    they were created, mostly when they make use of public toilets it 
    is very easy for them to contract the infection, as their 
    gentile areas are exposed to the 
    infection.
Most women would have contracted this infection even before 
    marriage usually as a toilet infection, but due to ignorance or 
    nonchalant attitude the infection would have affected the 
    reproductive organs. If you are a lady and in one time or another 
    you have treated one infection or another especially a venereal 
    disease, you have to make sure that you are totally cured. One 
    mistake that most ladies make is that once they experience itching 
    in their private part they go to chemists to buy drugs to stop the 
    itching. Once the itching stops they feel they are okay and free, 
    not knowing that they have only cured the infection externally but 
    internally the infection is still there. The internal infection may 
    not show any serious symptoms for some years, but it will gradually 
    be affecting the internal reproductive organs. When such women now 
    get married they find it difficult to conceive, running from one 
    gynecologist to another. Such lady could have saved herself and her 
    husband from such trouble if only she had done the right thing at 
    the right time.
Staphylococcal infection usually takes different forms, most 
    often, an infected person may not be aware of having the infection, 
    because he or she may not have any serious symptoms initially. 
    Sometimes a victim may be having some common ailments, which he or 
    she may just overlook as just an ordinary or common sickness. A 
    very good example of this is someone having a recurrent malaria or 
    typhoid fever, which always return after few weeks of treatment. 
    The funny thing about this situation is that when such people go to 
    the hospital or laboratory for test, all that will be revealed is 
    that they are malaria parasite positive. Such people will continue 
    wasting their hard-earned money on treating malaria without any 
    appreciable result. In some cases a victim of staph may not have 
    any defined symptom, but such a person will feel unwell, restless, 
    and constant headache. When such person goes to hospital for 
    medical check up, nothing will be revealed and
such a person is said to be medically fit. But within themselves 
    they know that they are not okay. A good example is a patient after 
    reading our article on staphylococcus infection and the symptoms, 
    came to our office to complain that he has been to different 
    hospitals for various tests which all revealed nothing. After 
    carrying out some series of tests on him in our office, he was 
    diagnosed to be having a heavy growth of staph. aureus and 
    he was treated and today he is staph free and a happy man.
I can tell you with every assurance that you too can be free 
    from staph or any kind of ailment that have defied those orthodox 
    treatment and I assure you that contacting us at Sound Health 
    Centre will make you thank God at the end of the day. Why should 
    you continue wasting your hard earn resource on what does not help. 
    I expect to receive your call or visit any of our offices. Those 
    outside Lagos can also benefit from our services, just call and we 
    will tell you what to do. See you next week herein.
