Traditional preparations and uses of maize
Introduction
Maize (Zea mays L., Poaceae) is the most important cereal 
    in the world after wheat and rice with regard to cultivation areas 
    and total production (Purseglove, 1992; Osagie and Eka, 1998). The 
    name maize is derived from the South American Indian Arawak-Carib 
    word mahiz. It is also known as Indian corn or corn in America 
    (Kochhar, 1986; Purseglove, 1992). It was introduced into Nigeria 
    probably in the 16th century by the Portuguese (Osagie and Eka, 
    1998). In Nigeria, maize is known and called by different 
    vernacular names depending on locality like 
    ‘agbado’, 
    ‘igbado’ or 
    ‘yangan’ (Yoruba); 
    ‘masara’ or 
    ‘dawar masara’ (Hausa); 
    ‘ogbado’ or 
    ‘oka’ (Ibo); 
    ‘apaapa’ (Ibira); 
    ‘oka’ (Bini and Isha); 
    ‘ibokpot’ or 
    ‘ibokpot union’ (Efik) 
    and ‘igumapa’ 
    (Yala).
The global production of maize is estimated to about 300 million 
    tones per year. 145million (or 
    about 50 per cent) are produced in USA alone (Ihelarouye and 
    Ngoddy, 1965; Kochhar, 1986; Purseglove, 1992). In Nigeria, its 
    production is quite common in all parts of the country, from the 
    north to the south, with an annual production of about 5.6
    million tones 
    (Central Bank of Nigeria, 1992). The country’s maize crop covers 
    about 1million hectare out of 9
    million hectares it occupied in Africa 
    (Hartmans, 1985).
Maize is prepared and consumed in a multitude of ways which vary 
    from region to region or from one ethnic group to the other. For 
    instance, maize grains are prepared by boiling or roasting as paste 
    (‘eko’), 
    ‘abado’, and 
    ‘elekute’ in Nigeria 
    and ‘kenke’ in 
    Ghana, or as popcorn which is eaten all over West Africa. 
    Traditional methods of preparations uses of maize are restricted to 
    definite localities or ethnic groups. This trend was also noted in 
    the traditional preparation and uses of cassava (Manihot esculenta 
    Crantz, Euphorbiaceae) by Etejere and Bhat (1985). The current 
    investigations on the traditional preparations and uses of maize by 
    various ethnic groups in Nigeria is to make available differ 
    methods of preparations and uses to all people.
Maize is a cereal plant that produces grains that can be cooked, 
    roasted, fried, ground, pounded or crushed to prepare various food 
    items like pap, ‘tuwo’, 
    ‘gwate’, 
    ‘donkunu’ and host of 
    others. All these food types are readily available in various parts 
    of Nigeria among different ethnic groups, notably among which are 
    Yorubas, Hausas, Ibos, Ibiras, Ishas, Binis, Efiks, Yalas etc. 
    Preparations and uses of the maize grains varied from group to 
    group, though at time with some similarities. Apart from food, 
    maize is also useful as medicines and as raw materials for 
    industries. About 28 food items or dishes and 6 medicinal values of 
    maize are discussed with aim of making available the divergent 
    methods of preparations of maize from various ethnic groups.
Methodology
Three methods were used in collection and collation of data. 
    These include oral interview of local people of different ethnic 
    backgrounds, field trips to some areas where maize is used in 
    making porridges or dishes, and consultation of relevant 
    literatures.
Preparations and uses as food
Maize is an all-important crop which provides an avenue for 
    making various types of foods. It also has some medicinal values 
    and serves as raw-materials for many industries. Grain is the most 
    important part of maize crop. It is put to many uses.
Pap: There are two popular paps in Nigeria; hot-pap and 
    cold-pap. Hot-pap is known as 
    ‘eko-gbona’ or 
    ‘ogi’ (Yoruba), 
    ‘akamu’ (Ibo and Yala), 
    ‘kamun’ (Ibira) while 
    cold-pap is ‘eko-tutu’ 
    (Yoruba), ‘kamu’ 
    (Isha), ‘agidi’ (Ibo 
    and Yala), ‘kafa’ 
    (Hausa).
To prepare paps generally, the maize grains are soaked in cold 
    water inside earthen pot or clay pot 
    (‘koko’) for 2 to 3 
    days. Then the grains are washed with clean water severally and 
    later ground to paste. Water is added and leave for days with 
    change of water at interval. At this stage, amount desire may be 
    taken, stirred and poured inside boiling water and stirred until a 
    semi-liquid porridge (hot pap) is obtained. In some cases, little 
    grains of guinea corn (Sorghum bicolor (L.) Moench, Poaceae) 
    are mixed with grains of maize, or guinea corn alone or millet 
    (Pennisetum americanum K. Schum, Poaceae) alone may be used 
    to prepare hot-pap (Banigo and Muller, 1972) just as described 
    above. New improved processing system of manufacturing or preparing 
    ‘ogi’ was discussed by 
    Banigo et al. (1974). 
    ‘Ogi’ is synonymous to 
    tea among the indigenous Nigerians. 
    ‘Koko’ is another thin 
    porridge similar to 
    ‘ogi’ except that it 
    contains tiny lumps of flour to add texture.
Preparation of cold-pap is differs a little. After the grinding 
    of the grains, the ground paste is filtered using clean, white 
    cloth to get very smooth paste. The residue of filtration (called 
    ‘eri’ by Yoruba) is 
    used to feed animals. It may also be sun-dried to make 
    ‘pete’ by Yoruba. This 
    is poured in boiling water preparatory to making of 
    ‘amala’ (a food 
    prepared with yam flour (Discorea spp. like D. 
    rotundata Poir, D. cayenensis Lam, D. alata L., Discoreaceae). Meanwhile, remaining fine paste after filtration 
    is allowed to settle down at the bottom of pot with water on top. 
    The top water which is called 
    ‘omi-eko’ or 
    ‘omikan’ or 
    ‘omidun’ is removed 
    while the paste is poured in boiling water and stirred to get a 
    semi-solid porridge. This is then put inside banana leaves (Musa 
    spp. L., Musaceae), or 
    ‘ewe-eko’ as called by 
    the local people which are arranged inside a small clay pot 
    (kolobo) to give a 
    characteristic doomed shape. Alternatively, it may be put inside 
    polythene paper (nylon) – a recent phenomenon. The hot is allowed 
    to cool down and solidified, and thus become thick porridge (i.e. cold-pap). 
    ‘Omadidi’, which is 
    popular among Isha people, is similar to 
    ‘eko’ or 
    ‘eko’-tutu but more 
    solid than the latter. There is a slight difference in its 
    (‘omadidi’) 
    preparation. The half-cooked watery porridge is poured inside 
    nylons at desire amount and re-cooked inside a pot containing hot 
    water, this make it more solidified than eko.
Major difference between hot-pap and cold-pap lies in the states 
    they are taken or served. While 
    ‘ogi’ and 
    ‘koko’ are served hot, 
    eko and 
    ‘omadidi’ are served 
    cold. Generally, paps may be taken alone or with sugar or with bean 
    cakes i.e. 
    ‘akara’ or 
    ‘moin moin’ (made from 
    Vigna unguiculata (L.) Walp., Palpilionaceae) or with 
    vegetable stew (e.g. Amaranthus cruentus L., 
    Amaranthaceae) or with ground nut cake, 
    ‘kulikuli’ (made from 
    Arachis hypogaea L., Palpilionaceae). A 
    bye product of pap called 
    ‘eha’ or 
    ‘eha-koko’ (this is 
    burnt porridge at the bottom of the pot) is eaten by man and 
    livestock.
Elekute
’: Dried grains are roasted with hot-charcoal and 
    ground into fine particles. Small amount of granulated sugar is 
    added to it to become 
    ‘elekute’.
Cooked or boiled maize
: Whole freshly harvested maize fruit is cooked or boiled until 
    the seeds are soft and eaten on the cob.
Roasted maize
: Whole freshly harvested maize fruit is roasted with 
    hot-charcoal over a wire-gauze until the seeds become brown. It is 
    eaten in this form on the cob.
Medicinal uses:
A crop which is highly edible and nutritious as maize, also has 
    some medicinal uses among the local people. It is used to cure many 
    diseases, which it had over the years proved to be very effective. 
    These include:
• Water filtered through charcoal obtained from maize stalk can 
    be used as a treatment to cure gonorrhea (AbdulRahaman, 1997).
• An infusion obtained from stigma of maize inflorescence can be 
    used for treatment of diseases of the urinary tract or passage 
    (AbdulRahaman, 1997).
•Water (i.e. 
    ‘omi-eko’ or 
    ‘omikan’ or 
    ‘omidun’) obtained 
    during the preparation of pap is used to soak bark or root of some 
    plants (e.g. ‘dokita 
    igbo’). This is used to treat fever and 
    malaria. Water obtained from the cold-pap is more effective than 
    that from the hot-pap.
• Cold-pap or 
    ‘eko-tutu’ is used more 
    often in traditional medicines. It is mixed with some preparations 
    (usually granulated, black particles) to cure some spiritual 
    problems. It may be prescribed to provide protection against 
    enemies, bad occurrences or to foster posterities.
• Holes are created or made in some maize grains to make rosary. 
    This is put on the hand (wrist) of a child to prevent him or her 
    from becoming slim.
• Whole dried maize fruit and dried yam with some charms are 
    planted or buried together. This preparation is done to unite or 
    bind couple together with effect that either of them cannot remarry 
    to another person. It means that they will remain husband and wife 
    forever.
Conclusion:
Maize is a plant which grown on a wide variety of soil ranging 
    from fairly coarse sand to the 
    Heaviest of clay (Kochhar, 1986), and thus it is found in 
    all parts of Nigeria. This opportunity must be harnessed to the 
    maxima. Even though, maize is chiefly a carbohydrate reached food, 
    it contains a sizeable amount of proteins, minerals (Table 2) and 
    vitamins (Table 3). It therefore means that it is a complete food 
    for low level income people. Osagie and Eka (1998) reported that 
    maize is the second most important cereal crop in Nigeria ranking 
    behind sorghum in the number of people 
    if feeds. Adequate and accurate information on this 
    all-important plant is very relevant and must not be localized.
Meanwhile, the findings contained in this paper are believed to 
    be an eye-opener to those traditional preparation methods and uses 
    of maize that are restricted to some localities which are not known 
    to other groups of people.
