Climate Change: From Awareness to Adaptation
Year 2007 was worse and more terrible for farmers, nomads and 
    pastoralists in Kebbi and Gombe States than previous years. 
    Communities, farmers and state governments were caught unawares 
    when heaven let loose in the second and third quarters of 2007. And 
    consequently, rivers, lakes and dams overflew their banks, and 
    massive flood swept off homes, communities and public 
    institutions.
In Kebbi, the disaster made great impacts on the communities and 
    their residents, and brought about collateral damage on lives and 
    properties. Even though no live was 
    lost, more than 3,000 people were displaced, rendered homeless and 
    made refugees in their land. Children too could not locate their 
    fathers; neither could the parents remember tracing their children. 
    In addition, over 300 homes were shattered.
Farms were eroded and uprooted prematurely. For pastoralists and 
    nomads, it was a tale of 'one loss too 
    many' because many herds of cattle, rams and 
    goats could not be found and accounted for again. According to 
    reports, some died while others were drifted away to unknown 
    locations. Even after the flood, different diseases suddenly broke 
    out, adding to its immediate costs, though concerted efforts were 
    made at different levels to tackle the effects of the floods.
Later in the year, there was a sharp surge in the prices of food 
    products. According to reports, food prices has since then risen by 
    an averaged of 30 per cent within the last six month. Before the 
    end of last season ran out, the surge went up by an averaged of 45 
    per cent. This was in part attributed to a dearth of food supplies 
    and production, which the flood occasioned. But there were other 
    factors contributing to food crisis and shortage apart from the 
    natural disaster.
This is not peculiar to Nigeria. Other parts of the world are 
    also hard hit. In Asia-Vietnam, 
    Indonesia and Thailand suffered from massive flood in the past 
    years. In South America, Brazil is not spared, while both the 
    United States and United Kingdom are also affected. Like Nigeria, 
    Malawi, Tanzania, Burkina Faso and Mozambique are worst hit, 
    suggesting that Africa too is vulnerable to flood.
This has been attributed to climate change. But the need to 
    reduce climate impacts on communities, homes and public 
    institutions has informed the Environment and Development in the 
    Third World (ENDA), Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa 
    (FARA) and IGAD Climate Prediction and Applications Centre (ICPAC) 
    to team up with Institute of Development Studies and create 
    AfricaAdapt.
Established to reduce human vulnerabilities in an age when 
    climate change becomes a threat, FARA coordinator, Ms Jackeline 
    Nman said AfricaAdapt “is the first pan-African network 
    dedicated to climate change adaptation on the continent.” 
    Agreed that it has brought untold stories of miseries on families 
    and communities in the last decade, Nman said the network was 
    created “to reduce human suffering and vulnerabilities, 
    which climate change often occasion.”
She said the network took cognisance of some constraint to 
    realising its set objectives. Nman said “AfricaAdapt will 
    overcome linguistic and geographical divides ensuring that 
    knowledge that can help vulnerable communities adapt to the changes 
    taking place is accessible to anybody exploring responses to 
    climate change.” The network is using different fora and 
    media to create climate change awareness and inculcate a culture of 
    climate adaptation that can help mitigate climate impacts.
This is evident in the statement of FARA coordinator when she 
    said the network “depends on interactive website, our 
    events, specialised radio broadcasts and support for innovation 
    will facilitate the sharing of knowledge on how to reduce climate 
    impacts on Nigeria with other researchers and vulnerable 
    communities across the continent. AfricaAdapt is free to access and 
    open to any individuals and organisations working on climate change 
    adaptation in Africa.
“The website will be a platform connecting users 
    according to their areas of interest and their activities. They can 
    sign up to updates on projects, themes, and events and receive them 
    through email, newsletters or automatic newsfeeds. Direct fora and 
    local radio programmes will be used to reach out to local 
    communities and ensure that their own knowledge and experiences are 
    shared with other stakeholders working to address climate change 
    impacts in Africa.
“We believe African media have a key role to play in 
    facilitating the sharing of knowledge with our communities. This is 
    why we will work with community-based radio stations and seek 
    opportunities to collaborate with journalists across the region. 
    Such experiences and research could help vulnerable communities 
    elsewhere in Africa to adapt to climate change. This is what 
    AfricaAdapt was set up to do,” Nman stated.
Why are communities and homes vulnerable to climate change? This 
    question has been answered from different perspectives, though it 
    was agreed that the challenges of climate change are enormous and 
    have forced academics, researchers and scientists to start working 
    together in order to reduce climate impacts on communities, homes 
    and the country's domestic economy. One of these efforts came 
    up at the University of Ibadan in 2007 during its 38th 
    interdisciplinary research discourse of its postgraduate school. At 
    the Ibadan forum, President, Nigerian Academy of Science, Emeritus 
    Professor David Okali raised alarm about the threat the climate 
    change poses to Nigeria.
Okali first outlined the causes of climate change. He put its 
    causes in the context of human action and inaction. He said “we are 
    responsible for alteration in the balance between incoming and 
    outgoing radiation in the earth atmosphere system. Alteration of 
    this balance is described as the radiative forcing factor. The 
    capacity of any factor to cause the alteration is measured and 
    expressed in energy intensity terms in watts per square metre, thus 
    providing a quantitative means of comparing the climate change 
    causing potentials of different factors.”
He also identified change in the concentration of greenhouse 
    gases, change in the concentration of aerosols and change in land 
    cover, solar activity and volcanic eruption. According to him, 
    “increasing concentration of various greenhouse gases are the 
    dominant radiative forcing factors in this industrial age. This 
    acts to increase the absorption of outgoing radiation which warms 
    the earth while increase in concentration of aerosol tends to 
    produce cooling effect.”
Okali explained: “Carbon dioxide is the important greenhouse 
    gas, contributing more than 60 per cent of the greenhouse effect. 
    It stays in the atmosphere for a much longer time (perhaps 100 
    years) than the other natural greenhouse gases. For instance, 
    methane stays in the atmosphere about 12 years.”
He said all the greenhouse gases “have strong human sources.” He 
    linked it with human activities in the course of ordinary living or 
    while pursuing development. He identified such activities as 
    fertilizer application, livestock production, cooking, heating, 
    cooling and manufacturing as the human sources of greenhouse gases. 
    He warned Nigerians to be conscious of their environment and tasked 
    them to engage in activities that would make the world safer.
The don pointed out that developing countries like Nigeria 
    contributed least to the global climate crisis that now engage the 
    attention of world leaders. But according to him, the countries, 
    which contribute least to the problem, are the most vulnerable. 
    This is what he described as the most nagging challenge of the poor 
    countries as they battle with development questions and governance 
    crises, which are now engaging these countries more than any time 
    in human history.
Calling for proactive leadership in managing climate change 
    challenges, Okali held that the country “faces uncertain future if 
    no defined efforts are made to mitigate climate impacts. Nigeria 
    falls within such countries that would suffer terribly and 
    unsparingly from the consequences of climate change.” Given this 
    picture, he explained, climate change now poses major threats to 
    human lives, health security, water resources, biodiversity and 
    agricultural activities both locally and globally.
He thus cautioned urban and rural dwellers to be mindful of 
    their actions and inactions. He drew inference from the 
    country's coastline which spans more 800 km along the Niger 
    Delta. He said: "calculation shows that a 0.2m rise in 
    the sea level will inundate 3,400 km square of our coastland while 
    a 1.0m will cover 18,400 km square of the coastal area. If 
    humanity must be protected, it calls for drastic measures and 
    multilateral efforts to save our posterity from untold suffering 
    climate change may bring about.
He cited the example of Niger Delta where Nigeria “generates 
    about 95 per cent of her foreign exchanges, 88 per cent of her 
    total revenue and 40 per cent of GDP. The whole of the Niger Delta 
    is less than 6,000 km square and total mangrove area in the country 
    is about 8,000 square. Our economy depends on the important 
    economic activities that take place in our coastal region. We have 
    important cities, infrastructures and installations in the region. 
    A little rise in sea level in this part of the country will cause 
    collateral damage.
“Nigeria will lose more than $9 billion as a result of the 
    catastrophe (especially sea level rise) while at least 80 per cent 
    of the inhabitants of the Niger Delta will be displaced due to the 
    low level of the oil-rich region. Sea level rise and repeated ocean 
    surge will not only worsen the problems of coastal erosion that are 
    already a menace, the associated inundation will increase the 
    problems of floods, intrusion of sea-water into fresh water sources 
    and ecosystem.
“It will also destroy stabilising ecosystems as the mangrove, 
    and agriculture, fisheries and general livelihoods. Such an 
    occurrence will heighten the social conflict already prevalent in 
    the region. The same will increase social miseries and human 
    suffering in the region and its ripple effects can destabilise the 
    entire political system of Nigeria,” Okali held. Climate impacts 
    are not limited to what the guest lecturer described as strategic 
    problem as cited earlier. Okali also hammered on the country's 
    proneness to drought and desertification. His analysis reveals that 
    more than two thirds of Nigeria is prone to desertification.
He explained that climate change challenges will increase 
    desertification, constrain productive capacities of the 
    agricultural sector and heighten the problem of ecological refugees 
    because Nigeria is vulnerable to climate change. “The physical 
    effect of desertification is not confined to the arid and semi-arid 
    parts of the country. It extends to the humid tropics, affecting 
    production of tree crops like cocoa from which our country generate 
    huge revenue,” Okali stated.
His explanation showed largely that humanity faces uncertainty 
    if human actions and inactions regarding environment are not 
    well-tailored to promote climate certification and governance. 
    Facts and figures presented reveals potential threat it poses on 
    food security, livelihoods and poverty reduction programmes. 
    Health wise, a number of 
    reports the guest lecturer cited reveal future uncertainty if “our 
    attitude remain unchanged towards how we manage our 
    environment.”
Okali cited the case of rice. According to him, rice is a 
    sensitive crop. A rise in temperature above 32 degree will result 
    to five per cent production loss. Water deficit, increase in pests 
    and disease may also depress crop and livestock production and 
    storage, hence crippling food supplies and production, thus 
    necessitating full-scale food imports. For these reasons, Okali 
    urged Nigeria to start full implementation of the United Nations 
    Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC).
