Protect women from depression, Nigerian men urged
NIGERIAN men have been enjoined to protect women from situations 
    that may expose them to depression, even as it has been noted that 
    one in every five Nigerian women is down with depression.
Making the call in Lagos last week during a workshop on 
    “Depression in Women: Way Forward”, Lagos State Commissioner for 
    Women Affairs, Mrs. Joke Orelope – Adefulire said poverty 
    was one of the root causes of depression.
Speaking at the event held at the Federal Neuro Psychiatric 
    Hospital, Yaba, she said: “We should not expose women to 
    psychological problems such as bullying harassment by husband or 
    bosses, inadequate care from home and emotional problems.”
Chief Medical Director of the hospital, Dr. Taiwo Ladapo 
    blamed the problem of depression on stressful life situations and 
    events women are exposed to due to their peculiar role in the 
    family.
“In order to maintain their homes, they put in their all, and 
    the many things go into it. And when there is a dysfunction in the 
    elements of the family, it gives them stress of various kinds. The 
    dysfunction could arise from such areas as troublesome or 
    rebellious children, stubborn and irresponsible husbands, 
    starvation amongst others.
He maintained that if not properly handled these women gradually 
    become withdrawn, sad, unenthusiastic and develop low self esteem 
    and life no longer has meaning to them.
“Depression is a serious condition that can impact every area of 
    one’s life. It can affect career, social life, sense of self-worth 
    and purpose, and family relationships. Generally anyone feeling 
    sad, guilty, tired and generally down may be suffering from major 
    depression.”
Stating that studies have shown that women are twice as likely 
    to suffer from depression as men, and Nigerian women are 
    particularly vulnerable groups because of their hard work, 
    commitment and dedication to the well 
    -being of their families.
It was gathered athat women 
    suffer depression more than men due to the changes in their 
    hormones. Factors that can reduce depression in women include child 
    birth and contraceptives, while persons who are too rigid may 
    suffer depression in their life time. Experts also say depression 
    can treated effectively as it is a common disorder, regretting that 
    only 20 percent of sufferers access treatment due to stigma 
    associated with psychiatric problems.
