Can insufficient sleep affect work productivity?
Mr John Akorede Abudu was a man who has a special skill at his 
    work place. Everybody respected him. With time, he got promoted and 
    moved into his house. Initially, he lived close to his workplace 
    because his house was in a traffic-laden area. He spent more than 
    three hours to get to work everyday, and another three hours or 
    more to get back home. Suddenly, his productivity at work changed. 
    He could not perform as much as possible. Sometimes, he even slept 
    off during working hours.
Employees are paying a high price for too little sleep when it 
    comes to work productivity, according to new statistics from the 
    Better Sleep Council (BSC). Respondents to the BSC’s 2007 Better 
    Sleep Month survey, conducted for Better Sleep Month this May, 
    reported an alarming decline in quality of work, poor judgment and 
    trouble retaining information as the top work-related consequences 
    from lack of sleep. In fact, 44 per cent said they were likely to 
    be in an unpleasant or unfriendly mood— all bad news for employers, 
    employees and customers.
Dr. Momoh Idris, a medical practitioner at Fulbert 
    Clinic, Ketu, Lagos, said that there is a link between sleep and 
    work productivity. "Sleep, medically, is a state of rest for 
    the mind and the entire body. So, when an individual is not having 
    enough sleep, it is believed that it could affect work 
    productivity."
By enough sleep, the Nigerian doctor said, "Actually, the 
    number of hours that will benefit an individual, healthwise, should 
    not be less than eight hours. An individual can decide to sleep for 
    two hours during the day, and six during the night. With eight 
    hours sleep, it is considered to be sufficient for the body and 
    mind."
To be realistic, not everybody can achieve eight hours sleep. 
    Idris mentioned factors that could serve as impediments to the 
    prescribed period of sleep, "There are several factors, such 
    as sudden occurrence, happiness, and unpleasant situations. A 
    person who is too happy, who just heard good news that is 
    mind-blowing, may not be able to sleep. As regards an unpleasant 
    situation, if a beloved person dies, over-thinking, and fatigue 
    (tiredness) may be some of the things that will happen."
Many will ask the question, ‘What has sleep got to 
    do with work performance’, "Some believe 
    you can accomplish more if you spend less time sleeping, but 
    limited sleep can affect every aspect of your life, including job 
    performance," said Dr. Bert Jacobson, Better 
    Sleep Month spokesperson and author of the new study 
    Subjective Rating of Perceived Back Pain, Stiffness and 
    Sleep Quality Following Introduction of Medium-Firm Bedding 
    Systems. "In fact, sleep deprivation impacts 
    your level of alertness, your productivity and your ability to 
    socially interact with colleagues."
In his contribution, Idris said, "Sleep has many things to 
    do with work performance. When an individual has sufficient sleep, 
    the entire system of the body, will regain the energy it used 
    during the day.
"When you over-stress the system, in the next day, you may 
    be at work, feeling dull, weak, and unable to do as much as you are 
    expected to do at work. So, when all those things come on board, it 
    may make the working productivity very low."
Studies estimate that sleep deprivation currently costs U.S. businesses nearly $150 billion annually in absenteeism 
    and lost productivity. And Better Sleep Month survey respondents 
    reported sleep deprivation impaired their quality and accuracy of 
    work (31 per cent), clear thinking or judgment (31 per cent) and 
    memory of important details (30 per cent).
Survey results also revealed that tired employees are turning 
    instead to quick-fix performance enhancers to remedy their sleep 
    deficiency problem, including:
•Drinking coffee or other caffeinated drinks (33 per cent)
•Taking a nap (17 per cent)
•Going outside for fresh air (18 per cent)
Many will wonder if there is anything that can be done in order 
    to obey the call of nature. The general practitioner said: 
    "Obey the sleep pattern. Every individual has his/her sleep 
    pattern. Some will go to bed very early, while some will go to bed 
    very late. If you are the type that ought to have gone to bed 
    8:.00p.m, make sure you are in bed by that time. But, 
    if you are the type who go to bed very late and you have adjusted 
    your system to that, then, sleep late, but not too late, so that, 
    you will have a sound sleep.
"Meanwhile, apart from those ones, it is better to avoid 
    some foods that can make you not to sleep. Study yourself, so that 
    you will know the food you can eat that can make you sleep soundly. 
    Some people testifified to the fact that, if they take certain 
    foods in the night, it will make them to sleep very well.
"Some people believe in having a bath before going to bed. 
    Others believe in reading, some others watch the television till 
    they close their eyes," he further said, adding, "If all 
    that has been mentioned is put in place, sleeping for eight hours 
    should not be a problem."
Generally, people will say, ‘it is better said 
    than done’. Reason being that, in Lagos, as well as 
    in some other major cities in the country, there is bound to be 
    traffic inhibitions. So, people wake up as early as 3:.00am 
    or 4:.00am to prepare for the day’s job. By 5:.00am, 
    they are on the way to their workplace. They may not leave the 
    office until 6:.00pm. The heavy traffic they will face before 
    getting to their houses will make them get home by 10:.00pm 
    or 11:.00p.m. The question is, how such people can sleep for 
    eight hours, so that their performance at work will not be 
    affected. Idris said, "It is very hard for such people to make 
    that eight hours. That is the why there is low productivity in many 
    organizations. They cannot meet up with the required sleeping 
    period. The energy they have exhausted during the day has not been 
    fully regained overnight.
"What can be done is that, they have to find a way of 
    compensating for it during the day. If possible, they have to be 
    given some time, no matter how little, to rest, during the 
    day."
Concerning an advice that can be given to people generally, he 
    said, "Some people know their status, but they tend to disturb 
    it by making calls at night, for instance, people now believe in 
    using easy talk and extra 
    cool. All those ones are eating up their time of which 
    during the day, will even add to the stress. I will advise the 
    young ones and even the old ones too, to either reduce night calls 
    or avoid them totally." But, can people really avoid the act, 
    going by the increasing level of poverty that is sneaking into 
    people’s homes, especially those who cannot have a balanced diet of 
    three meals per day, not to talk of a reasonable amount of money on 
    their phones?
He further said, "If you know you are the type that, once 
    you have observed your status, make sure you stick to it. Avoid 
    food that can get your abdomen irritated and unsettled."
Only 13 per cent of people, even across the world, are 
    willing to make the commitment to getting more sleep in order to 
    stay awake the more and productive at work.
