Corruption Management – An Alternative Proactive 
    Approach
Over the past few years, corruption has become a topic of 
    increased interest and debate within Nigerian society. Nigeria’s 
    independent media and other commentators worldwide are constantly 
    assessing the government's efforts to address corruption. This 
    public discourse is a critical element in any anticorruption effort 
    and is essential in raising public awareness of the issues 
    associated with corruption in Nigeria.
In a democratic society, the public's tolerance, or more 
    significantly, intolerance, of corrupt practices determines the 
    success of any anticorruption campaign. In established democracies, 
    elected officials react to the public's intolerance of 
    corruption by initiating investigations and/or enacting legislation 
    that results in reform. Consequently, we hope, the continued public 
    debate and publicity occurring within Nigeria on corruption will 
    result in the public becoming less tolerant of corrupt 
    practices.
The history of corruption is as old as the world, because 
    ancient civilizations have traces of widespread ‘illegality and corruption.’ (Dike, 2003). Thus, 
    Lipset and Lenz, 2000 noted that "corruption has been 
    ubiquitous in complex societies from ancient Egypt, Israel, Rome, 
    and Greece down to the present." Corruption is also 
    believed to be endemic in modern governments and it is not peculiar 
    to any continent, region, or ethnic group. This does not, however, 
    mean that the incidence and magnitude of corrupt activities are the 
    same in every society. Some countries are obviously more corrupt; 
    yet others have better plans in managing corrupt activities. 
    Obviously, Nigeria is not one of those countries with a better 
    handle on corruption, despite its unending corruption commissions 
    and all the noise made by every administration on the efforts to 
    transform the nation into a corruption-free society (Dike, 
    2003).
Therefore this article is written with a view to adopt a new 
    approach - managing the challenges posed by corruption in the 
    Nigerian society, rather than acting to punish incidents. This is a 
    sort of proactive prevention in the first place, containing it to a 
    manageable level. Corruption in Nigerian society has eaten deep 
    into the fabric, and is perpetrated not only by those who govern, 
    but also by the governed. Management should therefore be a 
    combination of sincere prevention measures and tough remedial 
    measures. These should be unconditional. (Zero-tolerance comes to 
    mind here).
Corruption is a complex and adaptive phenomenon that affects 
    many aspects of society and has plagued societies from the 
    beginning of time. It is difficult to define, understand, and 
    control. Because of the complexities associated with corruption and 
    the differing perceptions individuals have of the phenomenon; it is 
    not easy to define a realistic anticorruption goal.
* Is it realistic to strive for the total elimination of 
    corruption in any society?
* Can a corruption-free society actually exist?
Although a number of societies may have reduced corruption to 
    relatively low levels, none has created a utopian society where 
    corruption does not exist.
Today, corruption in its various forms and manifestations is 
    prevalent in all societies, even the most advanced Western 
    democracies. Transparency International's Annual Corruption 
    Perception Index does not reveal any country receiving a 
    "perfect 10" or "zero corruption" in the annual 
    country corruption environment rankings.
* Rather than creating unrealistic public expectations 
    suggesting that corruption can be eliminated, would it not be 
    preferable to educate the public to the reality that corruption 
    cannot be eliminated but can be effectively managed?
* Can realistic goals and milestones be established within 
    various components of society, specifically government 
    bureaucracies, to effectively manage corruption?
* Perhaps either knowingly or unknowing, this is what is 
    occurring in many modern societies in which corruption is a 
    relatively minor social problem. If so, can an effective corruption 
    management strategy be developed and implemented in Nigeria?
* What should be the focus of an effective corruption management 
    strategy?
As a Food Hygiene and Safety trainer, I always enjoy teaching 
    Pest Control to my students, and hence came up with what I call the 
    “Vermin Allegory” or figure of speech. The vermin allegory can 
    provide some guidance in developing an effective anti-corruption 
    strategy. When mice, rodents or other vermin infest a building, 
    there are two distinct strategy options available to combat the 
    infestation.
One is a "detection strategy" that attempts to catch 
    the vermin, most likely one at time. The other is a strategy that 
    cleans up the environment to make it unattractive to vermin. In 
    fact, the most effective vermin control strategy includes both 
    prevention and detection components. Pests like vermin, need 
    several favourable or conducive conditions before they can infest a 
    building: they need warmth; they need food; they need a dirty 
    environment; they also need some form of encouragement from the 
    building’s owner. Take all these favourable conditions away from 
    them, and they will not be able to infest the building, or if they 
    do, they will not multiply.
The vermin allegory can be used to develop and educate the 
    public about a national corruption management strategy. Its 
    application could result in the government establishing realistic 
    goals and milestones, and, most importantly, specific strategies to 
    address corruption throughout all the arms of government, the 
    public sector and the public in Nigeria. Although applicable to a 
    national corruption strategy, the methods described by the vermin 
    allegory might be better applied to address corruption within 
    individual Nigeria government bureaucracies. It would mark a new 
    direction if Nigerian government bureaucracies openly conveyed 
    their own anticorruption, or integrity strategy, to their employees 
    and the public. Perhaps this should be one of the initial 
    milestones of the Nigerian government's overall anticorruption 
    strategy.
As in the vermin allegory, any anticorruption strategy should 
    encompass both detection and prevention components. Since they are 
    more tangible, detection components of an anticorruption strategy 
    are easier to develop and implement. Investigations, prosecutions, 
    convictions, and sanctions for corruption-related offenses as well 
    as a mechanism for the public to report incidence of alleged 
    corruption are the most common anticorruption strategy detection 
    components.
Although the uniform application and effectiveness of these 
    components might be subject to debate, Nigeria has already 
    implemented a number of anticorruption detection components. The 
    high profile corruption investigations and public reporting 
    mechanism initiated by the Economic and Financial Crimes Commission 
    (EFCC) called the Anti Corruption Revolution (ANCOR) project, as 
    well as the conviction and sentencing of a number of high-profile 
    officials highlight anticorruption detection on a national 
    level.
Due to an absence of communication and the lack of transparency 
    at both political and bureaucratic levels, it is difficult to 
    assess what, if anything, various Nigerian arms of government and 
    organizations are doing to detect corruption. Similar to what 
    should occur on a national level, bureaucracies should establish 
    mechanisms for employees and the public to report alleged 
    corruption. This reporting mechanism should be structured so that 
    nothing can be hidden and be supported by an independent 
    investigation that would determine if the allegations can be 
    substantiated. The government organization's management should 
    also lead in a way that encourages managers and supervisors to 
    detect and report illicit activities.
In contrast, corruption prevention actions are far less tangible 
    and far more difficult to implement and assess. However, as 
    reflected by the vermin allegory, the proactive prevention 
    components of corruption management strategy are significantly more 
    important than those focused on detection. Realistically, it is 
    certainly more cost effective to expend resources to prevent 
    corruption than to incur the financial, social and political costs 
    associated with corruption. Additionally, once corruption has 
    permeated an environment or society such as ours, there can be no 
    assurance that any type of detection efforts will be successful in 
    eradicating it. Unfortunately, in most anticorruption campaigns or 
    efforts, detection is usually overemphasized at the cost of 
    prevention.
When addressing the issue of corruption, politicians and senior 
    government bureaucrats tend to emphasize reactive detection 
    methods. At the national level, detection activities are important 
    in demonstrating political will and gaining public confidence in 
    the government's anticorruption efforts. Detection activities 
    are also critical at the bureaucratic level in demonstrating 
    management's intolerance for corruption. However, detection 
    methods alone will never be sufficient to effectively manage 
    corruption.
On a national level, a corruption prevention strategy should 
    focus on enhancing the public's awareness of the social, 
    economic and political costs associated with corruption. Public, 
    politicians and senior government officials should be taught that 
    the purpose of government is to “serve civil society, not exploit 
    it”. These educational efforts should diminish the public's 
    tolerance of many corrupt practices that are currently viewed as 
    acceptable. Additional, national public education efforts may cause 
    the various agencies within government to be more concerned about 
    their public image. Government educational efforts, possibly in 
    partnership with social organizations, should also focus on 
    educating the younger generation on the evils of corruption as well 
    as acceptable and non-acceptable standards of public behaviour.
To prevent corruption, bureaucracies/civil service should do 
    everything possible to recruit individuals of high moral character 
    and do everything possible to ensure that the honest employees that 
    are hired remain honest throughout their careers, and this could be 
    achieved by commensurate reward. The same conditions should be 
    applied to political candidates for all elective positions. Since 
    prior conduct is the best predictor of future behaviour, a 
    comprehensive background investigation process would help ensure 
    that new employees or potential political candidates are of good 
    moral character. Establishing and enforcing agency codes of conduct 
    and instituting integrity-related training programs, including 
    enhancing critical thinking and situational planning, are also 
    necessary to prevent corruption.
In addition, government systems and processes should be 
    modernized and streamlined to minimize rent seeking opportunities. 
    Although the fear of punishment is seldom sufficient to deter 
    habitual bad behaviour, the various governments should establish 
    and consistently apply penalties that reflect the consequences of 
    violating the agency's code of conduct.
Supervisors and managers within the bureaucracy should also be 
    held responsible and accountable for any misconduct by their 
    employees. There is no reason, for example, why all the states and 
    local governments in the country should not have their own 
    independent anti-corruption agencies which will work very closely 
    with the national agencies like the EFCC, ICPC and the Code of 
    Conduct Tribunals.
In all sincerity, Nigeria, since the new democratic dispensation 
    began in 1999, has made noticeable progress in its ongoing 
    anticorruption campaign, although many Nigerians believe the 
    anti-corruption campaign under President Yar ‘Adua has floundered, 
    what with the on-going political somersaulting, double-speaks, 
    subterfuges and face-volte in the country, it does not look like 
    the Yar ‘Adua administration would be anything different than that 
    of Obasanjo or even previous military governments. In fact, it 
    seems to be getting worse, and this seems to be buttressed by the 
    fact that many indicted, accused former Governors, Ministers and 
    party officials are still walking around free today, their loot 
    intact, and several of them are alleged to be the real power behind 
    this Administration of the so-called “servant-leader.” Some of them 
    have even found their way back into the government openly and 
    against public opinion. Several of them, including serving 
    Governors are known to be controlling the Federal ministries by 
    installing their appointees in choice ministerial or civil service 
    positions.
At the same time, let us realise and accept that we are all 
    complicit in this corruption issue. It is not only the leaders, but 
    also the “led”. We, the “led”, are as complicit, because we allow 
    the leaders to be corrupt in so many ways. We are as complicit 
    because we tend to turn a blind eye such that the leaders now take 
    it for granted to be corrupt, and we also expect them to be too. We 
    even sing their praises, adore them, and confer dubious honours on 
    them in the traditional society, the churches, the mosques, at 
    parades, at parties, events, seminars, conferences, offices, etc. 
    No, our leaders are not the only corrupt ones; after all they are a 
    product of the society that spawns them. The larger Nigerian 
    society cannot absolve itself of this blame.
The government should consider how best to maintain and refine 
    the country's corruption detection activities while also 
    developing and implementing corruption prevention strategies 
    essential to effectively managing corruption throughout Nigeria. 
    This is the only alternative. If the government keeps on saying it 
    wants to eradicate corruption in Nigerian society, it is not being 
    sincere with us. Corruption can never be eradicated in any society, 
    it can only be managed, and managed effectively and efficiently to 
    derive any success.
The key word here is “management”. It is how the government 
    manages corruption that will determine its effectiveness. In this 
    century, emphasis is being placed on management – change, 
    financial, people, information, self, stress, time, absence, 
    capacity, etc – and this is how we should view corruption: 
    Corruption Management.
Unruh, 2008 concluded that taking a corruption management 
    approach requires fusing the insights of corporate ethics with the 
    tactics used to fight systemic corruption. When successful, it 
    creates something simple and elegant: integrity. I will add that, 
    in the case of governance of a country, it also creates 
    development, justice, peace and progress. And these are all we need 
    and ask for from our various governments.
