Taking Almajiris off the Streets
The Almajiri phenomenon seems to have defied solutions from 
    successive generation of policy-makers. However, in Zamfara State, 
    a novel idea of tackling the menace may provide an answer to the 
    age-long problem, writes IMAM 
    IMAM
They come in droves and in varying ages. What stands them out, 
    apart from their dirty and torn cloths, is their bowl of food, sore 
    wounds, and pity sights all begging for food or money. In all major 
    towns and cities in Northern Nigeria, they are unmistakably 
    present, moving from one place to another asking for crumbs to 
    survive. Welcome to the world of the renowned Almajiris.
The above description does not always present what an Almajiri 
    is, or should be. The word emanated from the Arabic word 
    almuhajirin and by that, the word 
    almuhajirin, means the emigrant. 
    In Hausa, the term Almajiri is associated with children between the 
    ages of seven and fifteen who attend informal religious schools and 
    who roam about with the purpose of getting assistance or alms; or 
    even a child who engages in some form of labour to earn a 
    living.
For many though, the Almajiri system, known as the 
    Tsangaya model, has long outlived 
    the purpose it was earlier set to accomplish and therefore need 
    complete overhauling in order to conform to the exigencies of 
    modern times. For instead of being a breeding ground for the 
    learned mullahs who are the torch bearers of Islamic religion as 
    obtained in other Muslim climes; it has unfortunately become a 
    veritable avenue for the mass productions of miscreants and other 
    social urchins.
Today, the issue of Almajiri has become the most challenging 
    problem facing the social landscape of Northern Nigeria. Various 
    submissions have been made by experts and scholars on the best way 
    to tackle the problem. Due to the efforts of such experts, a bill 
    is now before the National Assembly which seeks to establish a 
    commission against child destitution and related matters. As with 
    all issues related to the Almajiri, the bill, sponsored by Senator 
    Umar Tafida, has generated much controversy with some saying it has 
    failed to consider the peculiar nature of the problems of the 
    Almajiri while seeking to address the problem.
Away from the exchanges among the opponents and the proponents 
    of the bill, a concerted and practical effort to tackle the menace 
    has already started. In a novel idea presented by the Zamfara state 
    Universal Basic Education Board (UBEB), the state government has 
    adopted measures aimed at improving the lots of the children, as 
    well as where the stay to get Qur’anic studies from their 
    Mallams.
Giving an insight into their proposal, Executive chairman of the 
    Zamfara SUBEB, Alhaji Aliyu Muhammad Anka, said the need to fully 
    implement the UBE curriculum made the foray into 
    Tsangaya education necessary. He said the pilot 
    project, which is expected to achieve full result in the next 10 
    years, will be jointly funded by the UBE and the Zamfara State 
    Government. He said the idea is to give the Almajiri, who are the 
    products of the Qur’anic schools some form of western education to 
    meet their every day challenges in life.
As part of the intervention measure, the commission has 
    distributed the sum of twelve million Naira to twelve selected 
    Qur’anic schools across the 14 local government areas of the state. 
    “First of all, we are talking about age groups in the range of 0-6 
    and 6-11. In this part of the country, we have majority who fall 
    within this age groups who are outside the school system, and 
    because there are no facilities in schools which can accommodate 
    them, it then becomes imperative for us to reach out to them.
“They are part of the UBE scheme and they are entitled to enjoy 
    the scheme. So if we cannot bring those children into the formal 
    school system, we have to reach them where they are. That was what 
    necessitated the integration of the Islamic education system into 
    the UBE indirectly through the integrated arrangement.
For a start, we have selected twelve schools for the take off of 
    the project and so far, we have been able to give them some funding 
    to be able to improve on their facilities like the environment 
    where the children learn, where the children sleep, their general 
    well-being as well as their feeding.
“So depending on the needs of each school, we have been able to 
    render them support to improve on their own way because we don’t do 
    it for them, what we do is to supervise and monitor how our funds 
    are expended. We have now reached a stage where we will build the 
    capacities of their teachers and train them in modern school 
    administration.
“As soon as the training is concluded, we will now get some 
    teachers from the formal school set up and set them to the local 
    Tsangaya schools to teach basic rudiments of English and 
    Mathematics and some aspects of western education without 
    disrupting their internal arrangement. In order not to dismantle 
    the foundation of the Qur’anic schools, we are closely working with 
    the local Malams. This is imperative because without them, we won’t 
    succeed in our set goals.
“The lessons will be conducted in their places of abode under 
    their supervision. As time goes on, we intend to introduce other 
    subjects and also formalise the Qur’anic schools set up to meet 
    universal standards. The funds are to be used to supplement 
    existing infrastructures in those schools. They will be used to 
    provide mats, reading materials, kettles, dish and bowls, and other 
    items found in such schools.
“The Malams have been instructed to properly monitor the 
    movement of the children. None of his students should be on the 
    street begging. So as time goes on, when we fully expand the 
    programme to cover all schools, you won’t find Almajiri on the 
    streets any more," the chairman said.
He added that so far, the responses from the local Mallams have 
    been positive, a development that necessitated the disbursement of 
    the six million Naira to the twelve schools earmarked for the pilot 
    project. The highest amount of N511, 000 went to Makarantar 
    Alaramma in Gusau, the state capital.
One problem envisaged that may hinder the success of the project 
    is the migrant nature of the Malams and their students, the UBE 
    boss. He believes the involvement of traditional rulers in the 
    state will tackle that problem. “In the past, we have used 
    religious and traditional rulers in the mobilisation and 
    sensitisation of the people towards realising the importance of the 
    UBE to the overall development of education in the state.
“We have held stakeholder consultations at both local and state 
    level, and in some instances at zonal level among states in the 
    North West geo-political zone comprising Sokoto, Kebbi, Kaduna, 
    Katsina, Kano, Jigawa and of course Zamfara States. At those local 
    policy dialogues, we have been able to agree with all stakeholders, 
    including teachers, parents, politicians and non governmental 
    organisations on the state of readiness of UBE in the state and 
    frankly, they have helped us in mapping our strategies even before 
    we started implementation of the scheme.
“As soon the programme got underway, the implementation was not 
    difficult because the stakeholders have been fully taken along. We 
    this level of success because the stakeholders have shown enough 
    zeal and commitment to move the scheme forward. We on our part have 
    been careful to carry them along because should there be a 
    friction, then the success we all desire will not be achieved.
“So the state implementation committee of this pilot programme 
    includes traditional rulers among who is the Emir of Zamfara 
    (Alhaji Attahiru Ahmad Muhammad) and I know the emir is very much 
    interested in the integration process. I also know that at the 
    emirate level, they have come up with polices which seek to check 
    the movement of children from one part of the country to another 
    and from even outside the country into their own domain.
“They have devised ways of ensuring that those Mallams are 
    prevented from moving out of a given locality with those children. 
    At this stage, we have restricted ourselves to working with those 
    Mallams who are stationed in one locality, so we are dealing with 
    people we know, we can identify most of these children, we know 
    their parents and we know how to handle them.
“The only problem is that we do not have the facilities to bring 
    all of them at the same time into the formal school system. That is 
    why we leave them where they are. At this stage, it is not a big 
    project, we have released only N12m to them (six million naira 
    twice) and it is helping the local Mallams run their schools 
    without much difficulty,” he stressed.
Anka said for the scheme to be successful, special attention 
    will be paid in the quality and caliber of teachers that will be 
    sent to those Tsangaya schools to teach. “For the scheme to be 
    successful, qualified teachers need to be hired to run the project. 
    I used the word qualified because most of the teachers we had 
    before are not qualified to teach in schools going by the provision 
    of the National Council on Education.”
Analysts are of the opinion that such intervention comes handy 
    especially now that the Almajiri issue has worsened and defied 
    various half-measure solutions from successive governments. Aminu 
    Kanoma, a Gusau-based commentator, said a definite solution needs 
    to be found before the bubble bust.
“These (Almajiri) kids follow their Malams to towns at periods 
    when they are most vulnerable. The Zamfara initiative is good 
    because the beneficiaries will be kept under watch and will be 
    monitored by authorities concerned. I don’t know how the government 
    plans to expand the project, but I think the state Zakkat board 
    should come into this full time. That is part of their objectives 
    and I hope they will join hands with the Universal Education Board 
    to see to the success of the project,” he emphasised.
