Nigerians lament rising incidences of child sexual 
    abuse
Concerned Nigerians at a 2 -day Consultative meeting of Media 
    Concern Initiative for Women and Children (MEDIACON) in Lagos have 
    raised alarm over the rising increase in child sexual abuse in the 
    country, lamenting that most of the offenders go unpunished due to 
    inadequate time frame for prosecution.
Speaking to Good Health Weekly, the Director from the Office of 
    the Public Defenders (OPD), Lagos State, Mrs. Omotola Rotimi 
    said the law did not provide adequate time to prosecute 
    offenders.
According to Rotimi, the law only provided two months within 
    which an offender should be prosecuted, this she said has made it 
    more difficult for offenders to be brought to book. Omotola in her 
    paper entitled, “What does the law say?” disclosed 
    that only five offenders have been prosecuted out of hundreds of 
    cases lying before the office due to so many constraints, ranging 
    from timing and lack of forensic evidence, inability of parents to 
    allow their wards to testify and social stigma. 
    "
Her words, “There is a loophole on the defilement. For instance, 
    you must prosecute within two months the offence is committed. This 
    has made it impossible to prosecute over 100s of cases standing 
    before the office. In the last few years we have only been able to 
    prosecute five cases and these girls are all under 10 years.”
Stating that Lagos state has declared zero tolerance to sexual 
    and child abuse, she identified some of the constraints to include; 
    Social stigma, lack of DNA facilities in the country amongst 
    others.
She advocated for the elongation of the two months period to 
    five years in Nigeria in order to effectively pin the offenders 
    down and bring them to book.
Also speaking, Executive Director of MEDIACON, Princess Olufemi 
    Kayode who identified communication and massive awareness as a 
    major tool in eliminating child and sexual abuse explained that the 
    meeting was specifically to sensitize market men and women on the 
    need to be more informed and educate their children as well as 
    prevent such ugly situations around their young ones.
She however hinted that due to recent awareness many Nigerians 
    are now coming out of their shells to talk about the problem unlike 
    years back.
Kayode further disclosed that about 20 cases of child abuse were 
    reported monthly to her organization, stressing that the situation 
    has shown that long silence about child abuse has been broken and 
    awareness was coming up unlike before.
MEDICON Executive Director, said parents and guardians needs to 
    educate both boys and girls about sex.
“Some parents don’t want to talk about sex education and this is 
    a subject that needs to be arrested. They have to teach them about 
    issues of sexuality, because these children are being expose to 
    different images through the television and newspapers.
Parents have the responsibility of telling them the consequences 
    of what they are viewing not being harsh or scolding such a child 
    will save the situation.”
Some of the participants who spoke to Vanguard acknowledged the 
    problem created by child and sexual abuse. Alhaja Risikat 
    Abdulkareem, the Iyaloja General of Ojokoro Local Government and 
    Alhaji Yusuf Adebowale who is also Vice Baba Loja Lagos State 
    promised to pass the messages to their members during their monthly 
    meetings as part of efforts to reduce the rate of sexual abuse.
