Maternal death:Caging the terror of Nigerian 
    women
It took the death of some soldiers during an encounter 
    with Niger Delta militants to provoke the military authorities into 
    declaring an all out offensive to flush out and punish the killers. 
    Why? Because a life in service of the nation is considered precious 
    enough to be treasured. But everyday several Nigerian women go into 
    the battle of giving birth to children and not many come out of it 
    alive to tell the happy story. In fact, statistics from relevant 
    sources have it that maternal mortality in Nigeria is not only 
    alarmingly high but one of the highest in the world. It is even 
    more disturbing because government in spite of its posturing in 
    addressing the problem has only succeeded so far in paying lip 
    service to it. Sola Ogundipe and Chioma Obinna report.
A COMMON cliche in Nigeria in recent times is that the quickest 
    way for a woman to “find death” is simply to become pregnant.
“About every 10 minutes, a Nigerian woman dies as a result of 
    complications of pregnancy or childbirth and hundreds of thousands 
    more are disabled in birth related accidents every year.”
This daunting statement was the gloomy verdict on the nation as 
    the world marked the 2009 Safe Motherhood Day, May 26. By and 
    large, this is the lamentable situation in Nigeria today.
It is indisputable that women in the country are dying before, 
    during or after childbirth. The lamentation of unnecessary loss of 
    lives has been on for so long it is beginning to sound like a 
    broken record.
Somewhere, it is either lamentation of one woman dying of a 
    pregnancy-related complication or illness, or a tale of woe of 
    another woman surviving the onslaught of a pregnancy-related 
    complication, only to be permanently condemned to a life of strife. 
    The bottom line is that all over the land there is lamentation 
    about the wastage of human life in the guise of maternal 
    mortality.
From all indications, high maternal mortality and morbidity 
    rates in Nigeria have remained a pattern and the rates have 
    remained particularly worrisome.
According to the World Health Organisation (WHO) and UNICEF, a 
    woman in Nigeria has a 1-in-18 risk of dying in childbirth or from 
    pregnancy-related causes during her lifetime, which is higher than 
    the overall 1-in-22 risk for women throughout sub-Saharan 
    Africa.
The risks of maternal death are even greater for Nigerian women, 
    in the northern region of the country, rural women, and low income 
    women without formal education. Essentially, from Lagos to 
    Maiduguri, from Calabar to Sokoto, the story is the same. High 
    maternal mortality in Nigeria is one problem that has simply 
    refused to go away.
The statistics are indeed frightening and the numerous numbers 
    of death are numbing. It is on record that every year an estimated 
    59,000 Nigerian women die due to pregnancy-related complications, 
    second only to India in the world ranking of countries with high 
    maternal mortality deaths. There is no running away from the fact 
    that Nigeria has an epidemic of maternal mortality.
This distressing and disturbing fact is extrapolated from 
    findings which show that the country has one of the highest 
    maternal mortality rates in the world contributing an approximate 
    10 per cent of the total world estimate of maternal deaths.
For every woman that dies, 15 – 20 other women suffer short or 
    long-term disabilities including obstetric fistulae, ruptured 
    uterus and paralysis and complications such as Vesico Vaginal 
    Fistulae (VVF).
Maternal death, according to the World Health Organisation is 
    the “death of a woman while pregnant or within 42 days of 
    termination of pregnancy, irrespective of the duration and site of 
    the pregnancy, from any cause related to or aggravated by the 
    pregnancy or its management, but not from accidental or incidental 
    causes.”
Pregnancy-related death is “death of a woman while pregnant or 
    within 42 days of termination of pregnancy, irrespective of the 
    cause of death”.
The majority of these maternal deaths, are not just preventable, 
    but outright unnecessary. A report from Women Advocates Research 
    andDocumentation 
    Centre (WARDC) and the Center for Reproductive Rights (CRR) which 
    focuses specifically on the Nigerian government’s responsibility 
    for the dire state of maternal health in the country puts the issue 
    in perspective.
Entitled “Broken Promise:. Human Rights, Accountability 
    & Maternal Deaths in Nigeria”, the 
    report provides an analysis of some of the key factors that 
    contribute to Nigeria’s high maternal mortality rate and their 
    human rights and legal implications.
It looks at failures in government leadership, including issues 
    involving health-care financing and corruption, and discusses how 
    the nation’s lack of contraceptive access and funding contributes 
    to its high maternal death rate amongst others.
While the Nigerian government has repeatedly identified maternal 
    mortality and morbidity as a pressing problem and developed laws 
    and policies in response, the report notes that “these actions have 
    not translated into a significant improvement in maternal health 
    throughout the country.
A number of factors inhibit the provision and availability of 
    maternal health care in the country, including: the inadequacy or 
    lack of implementation of laws and policies, the prevalence of 
    systemic corruption, weak infrastructure, ineffective health 
    services, and the lack of access to skilled health-care providers 
    worsened by separation of responsibilities for the provision of 
    health care among the country’s three tiers of government.
But the absence of a constitutional or other legal prescription 
    of health-care responsibilities is largely seen as the cause of a 
    dysfunctional health-care system in which all three tiers of 
    government have failed to prioritise their health-care duties, 
    having deleterious effects for women seeking maternal care. Issues 
    around resource allocation for health care also abound.
According to the WARDC report, “most of these deaths can be 
    prevented Preventable 
    maternal death and disability are increasingly recognized as 
    pressing human rights issues, encompassing questions of resource 
    allocation and political commitment, for which governments must be 
    held accountable.”
The situation in Nigeria illustrates the importance of 
    government accountability in effectively reducing maternal death, 
    the report stressed.
But the pattern may be set to change, given the commitment of 
    the Federal Health Ministry. Maternal survival was prominent on the 
    primary agenda of the Nigerian delegation to the 62nd World Health 
    Assembly held in Geneva Switzerland May 18-22, 2009.
The nation was engaged in series of round table discussions with 
    the best experts in the business of saving women’s lives. According 
    to the Health Minister, Prof Babatunde Osotimehin, “We took on the 
    forum to make a 
    differencefor our women. We described the things we are 
    doing including the midwifery schemes, the anti-shock garment that 
    includes blood transfusion services and the training and 
    re-equipping of primary healthcare centers and the pulling of more 
    resources as well as increasing physical access.”
Also, to underscore the critical role played by healthcare 
    professionals in the country in ensuring safe motherhood, 
    Osotimehin has consistently advocated for an intensified skilled 
    birth attendance at delivery point.
He stresses that in order to for the process to take place, the 
    attendant must have necessary skills and an enabling environment at 
    various levels of health care system including a supportive policy 
    and regulatory framework, adequate supplies, equipment, 
    infrastructure, efficient system communication and referral.
While blaming factors such as limited coverage of practices like 
    efficient family planning/birth spacing services, poor Newborn 
    Care/postnatal care, hemorrhage, eclampsia, obstructed labour, 
    infection, unsafe abortion, malaria/anaemia etc., the 
    Minister notes: “the high maternal, newborn and child health 
    indices of the country are unacceptable”, he points to the Federal 
    government’s move to embark on the Integrated Maternal, Newborn and 
    Child Health (IMNCH) Strategy which is being rolled out to States 
    of the Federation.
In the view of Dr. Suomi Sakai, UNICEF Representative in 
    Nigeria: “We know how to reduce maternal mortality and 
    illness; it can be done. Basic measures—such as preventing and 
    treating malaria, providing mothers-to-be with adequate nutrition 
    and ante-natal care, training birth attendants, and ensuring that 
    health centers can offer emergency obstetrical care—save the lives 
    of women and their children.”
With the theme “Skilled Birth Delivery, A must for Every Mother” 
    a call for collective effort of all stakeholders to achieve the 
    strategic plan that would facilitate the ultimate reduction of 
    maternal and newborn morbidity and mortality appears firmly set in 
    motion.
But while government at the top could be lauded for its efforts 
    to reduce the rate of maternal mortality here, which is nonetheless 
    still one of the highest in the world, the problem remains. The 
    story of maternal mortality in Nigeria is still a paradox.
Everyone knows that Nigerians know how to reduce maternal 
    mortality and illness; everyone knows it can be done through basic 
    measures—such as preventing and treating malaria, providing 
    mothers-to-be with adequate nutrition and ante-natal care, training 
    birth attendants, and ensuring that health centers can offer 
    emergency obstetrical care.
Nigeria can save the lives of its women and their babies, but it 
    is saddening to note that enough is still not being done to stem 
    the tide of death. More is yet to be done to improve the well being 
    of women. In the face of a struggling healthcare system and 
    services at all levels of government, much remains to be desired. 
    If only Nigerian women could stop dying to give life.
Connecting maternal health with other MDGs
THE Millenuim Development Goal on Maternal Health has as target 
    reduction of maternal mortality ratio by three quarter by 2015.
In the developing world, the risk of death from complications 
    relating to pregnancy and childbirth over the course of a woman’s 
    lifetime is one in 76, compared with one in 8,000 in the 
    industrialised world.
Most maternal deaths are avoidable.
A key to avoiding them is better health care – particularly 
    during pregnancy, delivery and in the post-partum period. 
    Interventions that improve maternal health include: Antenatal care, 
    provider-initiated HIV testing and counseling, skilled attendance 
    at birth, emergency obstetric care, post-partum care and family 
    planning in keeping with national policies. When offered across a 
    continuum of care that integrates home, community, outreach and 
    facility-based services, these interventions can have multiple 
    benefits for mothers, children and the communities in which they 
    live.
There have been some promising areas of improvement in maternal 
    health interventions in recent years.
Coverage of antenatal care throughout the developing world has 
    increased by 15 percentage points in the past decade, with 75 
    percent of expectant mothers now receiving some antenatal care. At 
    the same time, many countries have boosted coverage of skilled 
    delivery attendance.
Ensuring that skilled personnel are present at all deliveries 
    and that these personnel have access to emergency care where 
    necessary is the most effective means of saving the lives of 
    mothers.
However the pace of progress towards reaching the Millennium 
    Development Goal on maternal health, which calls for a 75 per cent 
    reduction in the maternal mortality ration between 1990 and 2015, 
    has been too slow throughout the developing world and must now be 
    accelerated if the goal is to be reached.
To achieve the MDG target, maternal health must be addressed as 
    part of a continuum of care that connects essential maternal, 
    newborn and child health services.
Indeed, levels of maternal mortality often reflect the overall 
    performance of a country’s national health system – particularly 
    during delivery and in the postnatal period, when mothers and 
    newborns are most vulnerable.
To fill this critical gap, services that benefit both mother and 
    child need to be scaled up, as the health of the mother is closely 
    linked to that of her newborn.
“Saving mothers’ lives is not only a moral imperative, 
    but a sound investment that benefits their children, their 
    families, their communities and their countries,” said 
    Tessa Wardlaw, UNICEF’s Chief of Statistics and Monitoring.
“Indeed, there is a clear connection between maternal 
    health and other Millennium Development Goals, such as eradicating 
    extreme poverty, reducing child mortality, and combating HIV and 
    AIDS and other diseases.”
