The Failing Nigerian Health Sector
Health, they say, is wealth. In other words, one's state of 
    health, is very much relevant as a 
    determinant factor to one's state of wealth. As it is with an 
    individual, so it is with an entire nation. It is really sad to 
    note that despite being blessed in abundance in both human and 
    material and natural 
    resoources, Nigeria's health sector is nothing to 
    write home about. With the daily alarming death toll in the various 
    Hospitals across the nation, the Nigerian Health sector should be 
    of great concern to the present administration.
The sorry-state of the 
    nation's various Federal Teaching Hospitals, Specialist 
    Hospitals down to the state government-owned Hospitals, have made 
    the nation's Health sector, a 
    laughing stock. Most Nigerians, 
    try as much as they can to actually avoid going to these government 
    hospitals. But unfortunately, the poverty level in the country has 
    made many not to have any choice, 
    other than to go to this government owned Health centres that are 
    more like death traps for their medical needs.
Those that can afford the fat 
    -bills of the private Hospitals have gone on the increase 
    since the private clinics are regarded as the best option to have 
    access to good medical care. Even at that, some Nigerians still 
    prefer to go abroad for their medical needs. But looking at the 
    fact that about 70 percent of Nigerians are living below one dollar 
    per day, one would realize that not many can afford the private 
    clinics, not to mention going overseas.
The fact is that, many 
    Nigerians are dying silently on a daily basis 
    , as a result of the failing 
    health sector (especially for those who cannot afford the 
    private-owned hospitals). Apart from the fact that 
    , there are limited structures as 
    Hospitals/Clinics or Health centres in the country, especially in 
    the rural areas, the content-facilities and quality of service in 
    the Health care delivery, is 
    another big headache of its own. If one goes to a typical 
    government-owned hospital, even some teaching hospitals, across the 
    nation, one would discover that the same old facilities used in the 
    hospitals for years, are still 
    left and managed the way they are. Some of the hospitals, with 
    their old beds and dilapidated structures, are so smelly and 
    stinking in their surrounding premises that one's sickness 
    , would get worse when admitted in such an 
    environment.
In all of this, our political leaders (who are supposed to be 
    responsible for improving the health sector) and the wealthy class 
    , prefer to go to abroad for 
    medical check-ups and treatments. Some even prefer other African 
    countries like Ghana, South-Africa etc. while others go for 
    best hospitals in the United Kingdom (UK), Italy, USA, Germany, 
    France, Dubai and India. Just recently, President Umaru Musa 
    Yar'Adua was said to have flown to a German Hospital 
    (precisely in Wiesbaden), "for a medical review of an 
    indisposition believed to be due to an allergic reaction". 
    This was after the President signed the much awaited 2008 
    Appropriation Bill. With total amount budgeted for the 2008 fiscal 
    year, at N2.748 trillion, 
    comprising N860 Billion for capital expenditure and N1.888 
    trillion for recurrent expenditure. Even while in Germany, the 
    President was said to have reiterated his commitment towards 
    improving the Nigerians health 
    sector, that, Nigerians 
    , are anxiously and patiently 
    waiting to see.
We will not be mincing words to say that 
    , most of the past and present 
    state governors of all the 36 states of the Federation with their 
    commissioners, state legislators and Managing Directors (MDs) of 
    government parastatals, with their families and aides, prefer to be 
    flown across the borders of this country to foreign lands for their 
    medical check-ups and treatments, especially for their 
    wives child deliveries. One cannot 
    help but ask; why are they (our 
    political leaders and their families) 
    , running to overseas for medical care? Why will they not 
    attend the government owned hospitals, teaching hospitals and 
    specialist hospitals that are quite many in the country? We all 
    know the obvious answers to the above questions. It is simply 
    because of the bad state of these hospitals.
Just imagine the prevailing situation 
    , our political leaders and their families want to live 
    long , by going for the best 
    medical treatments, while they leave the citizenry to die as a 
    result of the deplorable state of the nation's health sector. 
    Is this not the height of self-conceited interests and disregard 
    for the well-being of the common man.
The annoying aspect is that every year, millions and billions of 
    naira are budgeted for the Health sector by both past and present 
    governments. The Niger-Delta State governors 
    , usually claim they have spent so 
    much money to improve the health sector of their various states in 
    both the electronic and print media. But yet, there is nothing to 
    show for it. Particularly in Delta State, with the newly 
    established DESOPADEC and their style of free 
    -medical care that are nothing but 
    disguised avenues of misappropriating public funds.
The fact is that, if the government has done so much as they 
    claim why are they (and their families) not going to these health 
    centres to be treated or receive their medical needs? If what the 
    state governments brag about the health sector is true, then why 
    will they not allow their families/children to attend such 
    hospitals, including the so 
    called free medical service provided in Delta State 
    . But no, they prefer to be treated 
    abroad for even catarrh or cough.
It is just simple display of their ineptitude and 
    irresponsibilities as leaders. Come to think of it, it is not 
    safety-wise for Mr. President and key security government 
    officials to be going for medical check-ups/treatments in other 
    countries. With the kind of technological advancement in the 
    medical field, the President or key security officials 
    , can be made/induced to'vomit' some secret security details of 
    the country and know one will know of 
    it, not even the president or persons concerned. In this modern 
    age, anything is possible. Other advanced nations like America, 
    Britain or even security conscious nations that are at war, Israel, 
    Egypt etc. cannot allow their President/Prime-Ministers to 
    go for medical check-ups/treatments in other countries other than 
    theirs, because it is not absolutely safe.
If we were to take an embracing statistics of how much have been 
    used by Nigerian leaders from the public purse 
    , for their (including families) 
    medical trips abroad, to other 
    countries, for the past eight (8) 
    years, we would discover that it is enough to transform our various 
    government owned hospitals to a status that will compete favourably 
    with the ones in Germany, U.K and what have 
    you.
In the medical profession, Nigeria can boast of being amongst 
    the nations with the best medical doctors around the world. Most of 
    whom have chosen to pursue their careers in Diaspora, where they 
    are "better treated" and "regarded" in the 
    medical field. Not to mention the well-structured and sophisticated 
    medical facilities, that is 
    inviting enough to make them remain there. The good doctors that 
    are at home, prefer to work with the private 
    hospitals or run their own hospitals. Where does that leave the 
    common man?
Honestly, the only thing that would make Nigerians to believe 
    and realize that the nation's health sector has been improved 
    upon is when our leaders, and their families, stop trooping abroad 
    for medical care. Reviving the health sector is not an impossible 
    task that cannot be realized, this is because we have the capable 
    hands that can man the affairs of this sector efficiently and 
    effectively. It is about placing the right persons in the right 
    positions. Not like the present scandal that is rocking the 
    Ministry of Health that used to be run by a professor. If the 
    Ministry's leadership and its team, including the House 
    committee on Health in the National Assembly, was effective and 
    active in their statutory functions, then the N300 million scam 
    would not arise in the first place.
Sectors like that of the Health, are sectors that 
    should not be toiled with since it has to do with human life. It is 
    not a sector that selfish interest should be allowed to thrive in 
    the name of occupying positions. Caution should be taken. Our 
    governments cannot spoil things at home, and then fly abroad to 
    seek for the best, leaving the entire masses to suffer. Our 
    governments should focus their energy towards revitalizing the 
    Health sector in their various states. It was even rumoured that 
    the Delta State governor, Dr. Emmanuel Uduaghan, one time 
    was flown to India for medical care. One would have thought that as 
    a medical doctor, the governor would know what is needed to bring 
    the state's hospitals to meet the standards they see in 
    Europe, America and Asia. For the fact that our leaders still leave 
    the country for medical care is enough justification to say that 
    they have failed in this area.
Yet, people, groups, chiefs and 
    traditional rulers out of selfish reasons 
    , sing praises of government's activities in the 
    health sector. The negligence of our leaders in this area 
    , has sent many to their untimely 
    grave. Our mothers, wives, sisters and the female folks 
    , are dying everyday during 
    child birth. The mortality 
    rate in relation to the entire women population is something that 
    should scare any reasonable government and make them get the act 
    together.
We urge the government at all levels to become more responsible, 
    more committed and more people 
    oriented towards the health sector issues in the country. 
    They should stop giving Nigerians the impression that what they are 
    doing to improve the health sector is only good for the common man 
    but not good enough for them and their families. Nigerians deserve 
    better than what they are presently getting from their leaders. Let 
    us do the right thing.
