Shape Of Real Estate in Post-Capitalization Era
By the end the deadline set by the Central Bank Of Nigeria (CBN) 
    for all commercial banks to capitalize to the tune of N25 billion, 
    would have expired. While many have already done it, some banks are 
    scurrying to the public issuing houses, and some are still waiting 
    on the wings to do so. Some have gone a step further to consolidate 
    through mergers with other banks to evolve into one mega banking 
    empire. The big healthy ones are seeking to acquire some smaller 
    not-so-healthy ones. UBA and Standard Trust Bank Plc have taken the 
    merger craze to an unprecedented height, evolving into the biggest 
    bank on the West Africa Coast, and knowing Mr. Tony Elumelu, 
    for the stuff he is made of, the consolidation will not end there, 
    until he is sure that he is presiding over the largest bank in 
    Africa.
To play down the importance of a nation's banking system is 
    to belittle the country's economic well being. It is to ignore 
    that country's economic growth and development. The Banks are 
    the engine room of a country's economic activities. What they 
    do or what they do not do will impact heavily on the country's 
    economic well being. They can stimulate growth and development or 
    retard them if not well directed. The activities of banks touch on 
    every aspect of human endeavor in a country's economy whether 
    manufacturing, real estate, export and import and the whole gamut 
    of economic activities that determine a country's status in 
    the country of nations. For example, for those countries that make 
    up the G8, their banking system has fully developed while for 
    Nigeria and other developing countries, the system is still in 
    process of transition. All said and done, the consolidation in the 
    sector will be the best and most revolutionary economic step ever 
    taken in our country and has the capacity to jump-start our long 
    awaited march to the promise land of development.
Where does it leave real estate? Like other sectors that make up 
    the country's economy, real estate will be largely affected 
    and by the end of the day, things will not be the same 
    anymore Opinions are sharply 
    divided as far as the North and South poles, even among the best 
    informed and a knowledgeable minds in real estate. That is to say 
    that real estate gurus do not exactly agree with another as to the 
    shape real estate will assume in the post-capitalization era. Some 
    posit that real estate will remain the same because banks are not 
    likely to commit more of their shored up ± funds in the area of 
    real estate development. Another school of thought holds rather a 
    cautious opinion that there would be a change but it would not be 
    significant because there are other issues outside finance (the 
    Land Use Act for example) that determine the pendulum of real 
    estate development. But a more radical group exuding a somewhat 
    visionary disposition are hell- bent on the postulation that there 
    will be revolution in the real estate sector anchored on the 
    premise of the change in the banking sector.
Each of this opinions is right in its own way, at least it is 
    better than sitting on the fence of indecision. Some movement has 
    to be made somehow. What is significant to note is that real estate 
    has always fared best in a dispensation of high tempo activities. 
    It abhors depression. It is tempting for this writer to take side 
    with the third opinion that the bank capitalization will impinge 
    heavily on real estate. Therefore, whether directly or indirectly, 
    real estate is not likely to be the same again. Directly in the 
    sense that the banks now put their funds into real estate and 
    indirectly in the sense that the sector would be positively 
    affected by the growth in the other sectors.
For real estate to thrive, there has to be supply and 
    commensurate demand of properties. Real estate suffocated in the 
    late eighties up to the early nineties because the two indices were 
    starkly absent. There was severe depression in the economy with 
    scarcity of funds attracting very high interest rates and 
    purchasing power whittled down considerably. No real estate 
    developer could survive in this dispensation, and hence the lull in 
    real estate.
The resurgence in real estate by the mid nineties before the 
    present civilian dispensation owed largely to the 
    profiliferation in the 
    banking sector. There was some growth in that sector even though 
    there was so much window dressing as was well evident in the mass 
    distress that set in soon after. It was one real estate era of 
    reckless spending that had many realtors smiling to the banks. As a 
    young estate surveyor in a thriving estate firm, this writer 
    managed a portfolio of luxury apartments with rents stacked to high 
    heavens then, as much as N1.5-2 million per 3 bedroom flat 
    per annum payable for several years. Most of the tenants in the 
    apartments then were bankers, because apart from oil company 
    workers and a few other categories of workers, they had the 
    financial capacity to pay for such expensive apartments.
Following the return of civilian rule in 1999, up to the 
    present, there has been an upsurge in real estate activities. These 
    ventures were demand-driven because with the country shredding 
    it's pariah status, many 
    foreigners came into the country to work in communication sector, 
    oil industry as well as banking. With the influx, the smart 
    realtors initiated many projects to service the needs of the 
    immigrants.
However the major problem of this era has been that of demand 
    not meeting the supply. Construction costs remain very high and the 
    developer who thought he could quickly recover as soon as he is 
    able to complete this array of houses had a shock waiting for him: 
    he could not sell his high priced houses because of the purchasing 
    power of his perceived target market. The result is that there has 
    been a glut of premium property in the market, against a background 
    of large unmet demand for the low-income category in many city 
    centers.
These are the changes the writer looks forward to in the 
    post-capitalization era. With more funds, the bank should promote 
    and stimulate more economic activities in the various sector of the 
    economy. When this happens, prosperity is on the rise or as the 
    Pentecostal pastor would succinctly put it "The people are 
    blessed". There will be many financial breakthroughs that the 
    purchasing power for real estate commodity (as much as for others) 
    will be heavily shored up. More people will build or change rented 
    accommodation. This will create demand for the surplus supply in 
    the real estate market of today. Secondly, with more funds many 
    banks are going to be better disposed to giving mortgage 
    facility-an issue that has been on the front burner for so long, 
    especially now that the Federal Mortgage Bank of Nigeria (FMBN) is 
    beginning to put its acts together. Interest rate are going to drop 
    definitely because we are going to witness an era when banks will 
    be chasing would-be entrepreneurs to present proposals for them to 
    fund. Loans will be readily available for real estates initiatives 
    and many banks will enlarge their real estate portfolios while some 
    others may just give it a try. Anyhow, it is an era when many would 
    have their housing dreams come true.
