Managing Stress
The Signs, Symptoms, Causes, and Effects... General 
    Overview
We all face different challenges and obstacles, and sometimes 
    the pressure is hard to handle. When we feel overwhelmed, under the 
    gun, or unsure how to meet the demands placed on us, we experience 
    stress. In small doses, stress can be a good thing. It can give you 
    the push you need, motivating you to do your best and to stay 
    focused and alert. Stress is what keeps you on your toes during a 
    presentation at work or drives you to study for your exams when 
    you'd rather be watching TV. But when the going gets too tough 
    and life's demands exceed your ability to cope, stress becomes 
    a threat to both your physical and emotional well-being.
What is stress?
Stress is a psychological and physiological response to events 
    that upset our personal balance in some way. When faced with a 
    threat, whether to our physical safety or emotional equilibrium, 
    the body's defenses kick into high gear in a rapid, automatic 
    process known as the “fight-or-flight” response. We all know what 
    this stress response feels like: heart pounding in the chest, 
    muscles tensing up, breath coming faster, every sense on red 
    alert."
The Body’s Stress Response
The “fight-or-flight” stress response involves a cascade of 
    biological changes that prepare us for emergency action. When 
    danger is sensed, a small part of the brain called the hypothalamus 
    sets off a chemical alarm. The sympathetic nervous system responds 
    by releasing a flood of stress hormones, including adrenaline, 
    norepinephrine, and cortisol. These stress hormones race through 
    the bloodstream, readying us to either flee the scene or battle it 
    out.
Heart rate and blood flow to the large muscles increase so we 
    can run faster and fight harder. Blood vessels under the skin 
    constrict to prevent blood loss in case of injury, pupils dilate so 
    we can see better, and our blood sugar ramps up, giving us an 
    energy boost and speeding up reaction time. At the same time, body 
    processes not essential to immediate survival are suppressed. The 
    digestive and reproductive systems slow down, growth hormones are 
    switched off, and the immune response is inhibited.
The biological stress response is meant to protect and support 
    us. It’s what helped our stone age ancestors survive the 
    life-or-death situations they commonly faced. But in the modern 
    world, most of the stress we feel is in response to psychological 
    rather than physical threats. Caring for a chronically-ill child or 
    getting audited by the company auditors are stressful situations, 
    but neither calls for either fight or flight. Unfortunately, our 
    body doesn’t make this distinction. Whether we’re stressed over a 
    looming deadline, an argument with a friend, or a mountain of 
    bills, the warning bells ring. And just like a caveman confronting 
    a sabertooth tiger, we go into automatic overdrive.
If you have a lot of responsibilities and worries, you may be 
    running on stress a good portion of the time—launching into 
    emergency mode with every traffic jam, phone call from the in-laws, 
    or segment of the evening news. But the problem with the stress 
    response is that the more it’s activated, the harder it is to shut 
    off. Instead of leveling off once the crisis has passed, your 
    stress hormones, heart rate, and blood pressure remain elevated.
Furthermore, extended or repeated activation of the stress 
    response takes a heavy toll on the body. Prolonged exposure to 
    stress increases your risk of everything from heart disease, 
    obesity, and infection to anxiety, depression, and memory problems. 
    Because of the widespread damage it can cause, it’s essential to 
    learn how to deal with stress in a more positive way and reduce its 
    impact on your daily life.
Signs and symptoms of stress
To get a handle on stress, you first need to learn how to 
    recognize it in yourself. Stress affects the mind, body, and 
    behavior in many ways— all directly tied to the physiological 
    changes of the fight-or-flight response. The specific signs and 
    symptoms of stress vary widely from person to person. Some people 
    primarily experience physical symptoms, such as low back pain, 
    stomach problems, and skin outbreaks. In others, the stress pattern 
    centers around emotional symptoms, such as crying jags or 
    hypersensitivity. For still others, changes in the way they think 
    or behave predominates.
Keep in mind that the signs and symptoms of stress can also be 
    caused by other psychological and medical problems. If you’re 
    experiencing any of the warning signs of stress, it’s important to 
    see a doctor for a full evaluation. Your doctor can help you 
    determine whether or not your symptoms are stress-related.
Causes of stress
Top Ten Stressful Life Events
(1) Spouse’s death (2) Divorce (3) Marriage separation (4) Jail 
    term
(5) Death of a close relative (6) Injury or illness (7) 
    Marriage
(8) Fired from job (9) Marriage reconciliation (10) 
    Retirement
The potential causes of stress are numerous and highly 
    individual. What you consider stressful depends on many factors, 
    including your personality, general outlook on life, 
    problem-solving abilities, and social support system. Something 
    that's stressful to you may not faze someone else, or they may 
    even enjoy it. For example, your morning commute may make you 
    anxious and tense because you worry that traffic will make you 
    late. Others, however, may find the trip relaxing because they 
    allow more than enough time and enjoy listening to music while they 
    drive.
The pressures and demands that cause stress are known as 
    stressors. We usually think of stressors as being negative, such as 
    an exhausting work schedule or a rocky relationship. However, 
    anything that forces us to adjust can be a stressor. This includes 
    positive events such as getting married or receiving a promotion. 
    Regardless of whether an event is good or bad, if the adjustment it 
    requires strains our coping skills and adaptive resources, the end 
    result is stress.
Major life changes
Major life events are stressors. Whether it be a divorce, a 
    child leaving home, a planned pregnancy, a move to a new state, a 
    career change, graduating from college, or a diagnosis of cancer, 
    the faster or more dramatic the change, the greater the strain. 
    Furthermore, the more major life changes you’re dealing with at any 
    one time, the more stress you’ll feel.
Daily hassles and demands
While major life changes are stressful, they are also relative 
    rarities. After all, it’s not every day that you file for divorce 
    or have a baby. However, you may battle traffic, argue with your 
    family members, or worry about your finances on a daily basis. 
    Because these small upsets occur so regularly, they end up 
    affecting us the most.
Daily causes of stress include:
• Environmental stressors – Your physical surroundings can set 
    off the stress response. Examples of environmental stressors 
    include an unsafe neighborhood, pollution, noise (sirens keeping 
    you up at night, a barking dog next door), and uncomfortable living 
    conditions. For people living in crime-ridden areas or war-torn 
    regions, the stress may be unrelenting.
• Family and relationship stressors – Problems with friends, 
    romantic partners, and family members are common daily stressors. 
    Marital disagreements, dysfunctional relationships, rebellious 
    teens, or caring for a chronically-ill family member or a child 
    with special needs can all send stress levels skyrocketing.
• Work stressors – In our career-driven society, work can be an 
    ever-present source of stress. Work stress is caused by things such 
    as job dissatisfaction, an exhausting workload, insufficient pay, 
    office politics, and conflicts with your boss or co-workers.
• Social stressors – Your social situation can cause stress. For 
    example, poverty, financial pressures, racial and sexual 
    discrimination or harassment, unemployment, isolation, and a lack 
    of social support all take a toll on daily.
Risk factors for stress
The presence of a stressor doesn’t automatically result in 
    disabling stress symptoms. The degree to which any stressful 
    situation or event impacts your daily functioning depends partly on 
    the nature of the stressor itself and partly on your own personal 
    and external resources.
Effects of chronic stress
Chronic stress wears you down day after day and year after year, 
    with no visible escape. Under sustained or severe stress, even the 
    most well-adjusted person loses the ability to adapt. When stress 
    overwhelms our coping resources, our bodies and minds suffer.
Health effects
Recent research suggests that anywhere from 60 to 90 percent of 
    illness is stress-related. The physical wear and tear of stress 
    includes damage to the cardiovascular system and immune system 
    suppression. Stress compromises your ability to fight off disease 
    and infection, throws your digestive system off balance, makes it 
    difficult to conceive a baby, and can even stunt growth in 
    children.
Emotional effects
Chronic stress grinds away at your mental health, causing 
    emotional damage in addition to physical ailments. Long-term stress 
    can even rewire the brain, leaving you more vulnerable to everyday 
    pressures and less able to cope. Over time, stress can lead to 
    mental health problems such as: anxiety depression eating 
    disorders, and substance abuse.
Severe stress and trauma
Severe stress reactions can result from sudden, catastrophic 
    events or traumatic experiences such as a natural disaster, sexual 
    assault, life-threatening accident, or participation in combat. 
    After the initial shock and emotional fallout, many trauma victims 
    gradually begin to recover from its effects. But for some people, 
    the stress symptoms don't go away, the body doesn’t regain its 
    equilibrium, and life doesn’t return to normal. This severe and 
    persisting reaction to trauma is known as post-traumatic stress 
    disorder (PTSD).
Common symptoms of PTSD include:
• Flashbacks, intrusive thoughts, or nightmares about the 
    trauma
• Avoidance of places and things associated with the trauma
• Hypervigilance for signs of danger
• Chronic irritability and tension
• Depression.
PTSD is a serious disorder that requires professional 
    intervention.
While unchecked stress is undeniably damaging, there are many 
    things you can do to control it and reduce its effects.
