Inside the community of physically challenged
Millions of Nigerian citizens with one form 
    of disability or the other are living practically in hell everyday 
    as they grapple with the realities of survival, reports Sunday 
    Oguntola with additional reports by Joe Agbro 
    Jr.
For two tortuous years, Timothy Oni combed the nooks and 
    crannies of Lagos metropolis for accommodation to no avail. If it 
    was about money, it was not a problem as he had loads of it to pay 
    even shylock landlords. Yet, accommodation remained elusive even 
    after he commissioned agents. ‘’I moved from one agent to the 
    other, doing everything possible to get a place to keep my head,’’ 
    he recalled. Oni was a qualified tenant except that many landlords 
    considered him a risk. "They would not give me accommodation 
    because I am blind,’’ he lamented, battling hard to keep tears from 
    flowing. After two frustrating years of searching for something his 
    able-bodied counterparts will get in less than a month, he finally 
    secured one last month in a suburb of Lagos. By then, he was so 
    drained that he could not even celebrate what he described as 
    "a big miracle".
Dare Dairo, a qualified TV producer once attended applied for a 
    job in a broadcasting station. Like all applicants, he went through 
    the long process of recruitment and was always emerging top. At the 
    interview panel leading to his final engagement, he shone like a 
    galaxy of stars, winning the respect of the interviewers. Just when 
    he was almost sure of resuming, the executive producer called him 
    aside and told him that the job was not meant for people like him. 
    "He said I should find somewhere else to work because of my 
    physical disability," he remembers with sadness. Dairo, who 
    limps, says he was devastated. Last week, he was still a sad man as 
    he recounted the incident, "That was a very sad day in my 
    life. I mean it was my dream job and I was set to give it my best 
    shot. If I was disqualified on the basis of incompetence, I would 
    have understood. But here was someone telling me I was unemployable 
    despite my qualification and experience on the field".
Stella Emeka woke up one morning late last year, bubbling with 
    life. On her schedule was a visit to a bank for transactions. To 
    have a head lead, she was at the gate of the Bank located in Agege, 
    Lagos as early as 8am. But two hours later, she was still outside 
    the banking hall, unable to make withdrawals. "I watched 
    helplessly as people came and walked in freely while I was denied 
    access because they said the security door will not allow me 
    in". Sensing she was heading to spending the entire day locked 
    out, Emeka said she created a scene, which attracted top officials 
    of the bank inside. "We had to reach a compromise that I 
    should be attended to outside in the full glare of everyone since 
    the security door would not allow me inside with my crutches," 
    she said. Since then, she said she hates banking with great 
    passion.
Oni, Dairo and Emeka represent 14 million Nigerians believed to 
    be living with one form of disability or the other by a World Bank 
    report. Put differently, not less than 10% of the Nigerian 
    population consists of persons living with disabilities (PWDS). 
    According to the World Health Organisation, persons with 
    disabilities are such "individuals with physical, sensory, 
    intellectual or mental health impairments that have a significant 
    and long-lasting effect on the individual’s daily life and 
    activities". For these 14 million Nigerians, living has been 
    anything but pleasant. Asked how it’s been living with disabilities 
    in Nigeria, all of those who spoke with The 
    Nation on Sunday used adjectives such as 
    "horrible", "hellish", "terrible", 
    "tough", "frustrating", "killing" and 
    "draining" to describe their experiences.
They agree that the main challenge against them in Nigeria is 
    stigma and discrimination. "Nigerians see us as ‘abami’ (strange people) 
    who are under divine punishment. They feel that we must have done 
    something to be blind, invalid, walking with crutches and 
    limping," Dairo said. He adds that this is why they are 
    discriminated against and treated as objects of scorns. Veronica 
    Okoli who has spinal cord injuries which confined her to a wheel 
    chair narrated her harrowing experiences with commercial vehicle 
    operators. "Many times, they won’t wait to pick you up and 
    when they do, they expect you to be as fast as the able bodied. 
    Just last week, I was thrown out of a moving vehicle because the 
    conductor was in a hurry".
At a point, she decided to patronise only cabs for conveniences. 
    "But it did not get any better because they won’t even wait 
    for you in the first place. When one out of ten waits, he is 
    charging you thrice what he will charge able-bodied passengers. 
    That was a big put-off because they should have charged us less in 
    the first place if they had any milk of human kindness flowing in 
    them." Dairo, who shunned the temptation to join the millions 
    of blind Nigerians begging for alms on the streets, started 
    producing soaps and insecticides to make a decent living. 
    "Will you believe that my products were discriminated against 
    in the market? People jeered at me and said ‘what 
    good can a blind man produce’. As a result, I had to 
    start giving free samples to people to test their 
    effectiveness".
Many Nigerians, they lament, will not even want to have anything 
    to do with them. "They see us as dispensable beings on the way 
    to hell. They consider us worthless and unable to get anything out 
    of life," said Victoria Akanji, an amputee. The impression 
    fuels stigma and discrimination as Nigerians keep them at arm’s 
    length, ostensibly to rot away. A few who lean towards them only 
    consider them as charities and paupers. This irks David Anyaele, 
    executive director of Citizens with Disabilities (CCD). "We 
    are not asking for alms or handouts but recognition as 
    full-bloodied human beings. People should stop insulting by 
    thinking of us as alms-takers," he said frowning. He said PWDS 
    need empathy, not pity, and support, not handouts. Already bugged 
    down by disabilities, stigma and discrimination from fellow 
    Nigerians are killing PWDS much quicker than their conditions, 
    subjecting them to psychologically torture on a daily basis.
Anyaele says it is hurtful that fellow Nigerians consider them 
    as second-class citizens who deserve no recognition or 
    acknowledgment. "You see it in the way they look at us. For 
    many millions, we are simply burdens who just fill up the space 
    with no economic values. This gets at us in a way we cannot 
    relay". For example, he said it is painful that able-bodied 
    Nigerians can push PWDS aside during rush for vehicles. "They 
    won’t even allow us to go in first. Whereas when I travel overseas, 
    people are willing to assist you get whatever you want first before 
    them," Anyaele said. This thoughtlessness and disdain for PWDS 
    extend to the provision of public infrastructures, most of which 
    are inaccessible to the disability community in Nigeria.
With this disdain, not all PWDS feel this bad. Aliyu Amusu has 
    only one leg - a victim of childhood disease which he doesn’t know 
    of. Last year, he was part of the team that represented Lagos state 
    to win silver at the Para-Olympic games. At twenty six, he is 
    unemployed. To make ends meet, Aliyu sits on a skateboard which in 
    other climes is for able-bodied people in Agege, Ikeja and its 
    environs in Lagos, darting between pedestrians begging for alms. He 
    presents a scary sight when he zips at top speed in and around 
    cars, trucks motorcycles, and pedestrians during the rush hours. 
    The deft but dangerous moves as he and others who share the same 
    plight would be envy of stunts men. He laughs and grins when told 
    of the implication of his brazen acts, but maybe he sees it as an 
    extension of Para-soccer (soccer for the disabled) skills which he 
    plays. He also does not feel too bothered about his condition. 
    "Na God makes me like this", he said. However, he 
    confessed his choice mode of transportation on fast moving 
    skateboards scares him at times. And it should.
Most roads in the nation are without sidewalks, which would have 
    enabled PWDS to walk beside vehicles on roads without the danger of 
    being crushed. Ditto for vehicles, which have no consideration 
    whatsoever for how PWDS will access them. Mohammed Sanni says 
    whenever he boards vehicles, he has to squat since his legs were 
    amputated. "My son has to practically carry me inside where I 
    only squat instead of sitting properly". Public places such as 
    libraries, stadia, schools, post offices, hospitals and worship 
    centres are constructed without any thought for PWDS, meaning most 
    of them cannot even access, less alone benefit from them. Dele 
    Bankole recalls with bitterness his inability to attend church 
    service in the last 25years 
    since he started using wheel chairs.
Also, many public buildings in the country do not have 
    facilities for physically challenged people. Even places of worship 
    are plagued with the same challenge. "I love to serve God but 
    I must confess I have not been in church for 25 years now. How can 
    I go when my wheel chairs cannot even gain access to the church? I 
    have to content myself with staying at home for worships," he 
    discloses. Azeez, as he simply called himself, managed to attend a 
    church service not long ago. "As I made to the altar to give a 
    testimony, I slipped and broke my back. My disability has worsened 
    since then," he says. An exception is however the Church of 
    Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. At the church premises in Opebi, 
    Ikeja, Lagos, the Lagos Centre Manager of the Latter Day Saints 
    Employment Resource Services, Victor Onumah said the structures 
    were built with easy mobility of people in mind. Onumah said, 
    "this is the way all buildings of the church are built." 
    The Utah-based church ensure all buildings on their premises have 
    gently sloping ramps to make movements of people on 
    wheel chairs a more pleasant 
    experience of entering and exiting. It is also good for the 
    elderly, many of whom might find climbing steps stressful due to 
    suffering arthritis and joint pains.
In public and private schools, blind students have no study aids 
    such as Braille for conducive learning. In hospitals, PWDS can 
    hardly access treatment, especially if they have to use lifts. 
    Broadcast stations have no sign translations for the deaf. Offices 
    and public buildings without ramps remain inaccessible to PWDS. All 
    of these mean inclusive and accessible public places therefore 
    remain a lofty dream for the disability community in Nigeria.
While able-bodied Nigerians simply walk to the polling booths 
    and vote for candidates of their choices, their disabled 
    counterparts have no such luxury. Anyaele, who was amputated by 
    Sierra Leonean rebels during the nation’s civil war, said he has 
    never voted since then. "My brother, I cannot vote because I 
    cannot thumb-print since I am an amputee," he said, shaking 
    his head. Perhaps mindful of this, the Justice Uwais-led committee 
    on electoral reforms recommended in his report under the general 
    recommendations section that "the national assembly should 
    enact laws appropriate for the protections of persons with 
    disabilities to enable them exercise their rights to vote and be 
    voted for". The report also in the proportional representation 
    and the under-representation of women and other disadvantaged 
    groups section asked that 2% slot be reserved for PWDS for 
    representation. Both recommendations are yet to be implemented.
At the governmental level, the situation is even worse. As at 
    today, experts say there is no government policy whatsoever geared 
    towards issues affecting the disability community. Prof. 
    Iheanacho Izuka of the department of Special Education and 
    Rehabilitation, University of Jos should know if there is any. He 
    says, ‘I am not sure they have it because I have not seen any. In 
    fact, there is none". Checks by our correspondent revealed no 
    policy whatsoever exists for PWDS in Nigeria. This means PWDS are 
    left on their own with no governmental direction or support 
    whatsoever. Izuka says such lack of governmental attention for PWDS 
    is as criminal as unacceptable. He disclosed that Nigeria, as a 
    signatory to international treaties and charters, get developmental 
    grants with the understanding that such benefits will be enjoyed by 
    all.
Izuka said, "The millennium development plan, NEPAD, IFAD 
    say it is a matter of right for all people. When money is given 
    out, it is expected that all stakeholders should benefit, including 
    people with disabilities. Nigeria is under agreements not to 
    discriminate against anybody on the basis of their status so that 
    everybody can be productive. Any act of discrimination, whether by 
    omission or commission, is unacceptable by the charters they 
    signed. The documents are replete with such statements. "
The special needs expert says it is a shame that Nigeria is 
    lagging behind in designing appropriate mechanisms for PWDS. Izuka 
    said that Nigeria has not even started at all. Nigeria, he said, 
    "should start with a national disability policy.
"Then we should do sector analysis as it concerns 
    disabilities in all sectors of the nation. If we don’t move, the 
    whole world is moving and leaving us behind. We have a lot to catch 
    up on. Every ministry concerned with the affairs of persons with 
    disabilities must have a sector analysis. There should be needs 
    assessment. Then, policy and objectives, which should be tied to 
    their strategic plans. There must be implementation blueprints, 
    which must be broken down to action plans tied to time frame. Then, 
    they must bring out monitoring and evaluation plans, which will 
    enable them to track for elimination of obsolete ideas and 
    evolution to make what they are doing relevant."
While PWDS wait for government to get to that state, they say 
    Nigerians should show them empathy, understanding and support. Oni 
    says, "We need a lot of encouragement. People should know we 
    did not ask for what is upon us. We need more love than money. When 
    love is there, other things will handle themselves. People should 
    support us to live better lives". For Dairo, "the first 
    thing Nigerians should not do for us is to pity us. Empathy is 
    better. They should not give us hand-outs or charities but 
    opportunities. We should assess people more on the values they 
    carry, not their physical status. It should be on what they can 
    contribute to the commonwealth. Let us give persons with 
    disabilities access and assistance to infrastructures that will 
    make us perform better."
