NTA Lagos pioneers internet television broadcast
Almost 50 years to the day, that television broadcast 
    was launched in Nigeria, Nigerian Television Authority’s Lagos 
    Channel 10 station, at the weekend unveiled Nigeria’s first 
    television station internet portal. Science and Technology 
    Editor O’SEUN OGUNSEITAN here 
    reports the event with CHARLES ADEWALE, SEINDE ELEDUMO, ADEKUNLE 
    ADENLE, KEMI OYERO AND JUMOKE ONASANYA.
Television broadcasts, including live 
    transmissions from Nigeria, can now be viewed on the internet. The 
    Lagos Channel 10 station of the Nigerian Television Authority (NTA) 
    unveiled the tool for this at the weekend.
In the presence of a small gathering at its Tejuoso, Lagos, 
    station, NTA Channel 10 launched Nigerian broadcasting into the 
    cutting-edge of digital broadcast. The audience which included 
    stakeholders in the broadcast and telecommunciations industry, 
    watched the launch of a live portal websitewww.nta10lagos.com.
Through the website, NTA television broadcasts can be watched 
    anywhere in the world wherever there is an internet service. The 
    barrier-breaking feat was conceived by Nigerians and excuted by 
    Nigerians.
The launch may have marked Nigeria’s first steps towards 
    readiness for internet-based television broadcast, technically 
    referred to as Internet 
    Protocal Television (IPTV).
An official Nigerian Broadcasting Commission response at the 
    event suggested that the government may have now accepted that the 
    era of broadcast territory regulation is over, giving way to a new 
    era in which today’s broadcast territory regulator may just become 
    a broadcast content monitor, not even a content regulator.
The NTA online portal is essentially a big internet website that 
    hosts smaller websites. The management of the station is offering 
    free advertisements to businesses and skilled persons desirous of 
    reaching out through the station.
It was executed by a Nigerian-owned company, MicroRes 
    Nigerial Ltd, hitherto a major 
    technical player in the internet service delivery industry. It was 
    executed on a private-public sector partnership arrangement.
By merely registering on the website, skilled persons, upcoming 
    musicians and other artistes can 
    expect to be adopted and promoted by the television station.
According to Mr. Shakiru Rufai, the Managing Director and 
    Chief Executive Officer of MicroRes Ltd, the managers of the portal 
    have a goal of turning the novel facility into Nigeria’s most 
    patronised.
His words: "By combining the unmatchable reach of the NTA 
    with an interactive website that meets as much social networking 
    needs of young people as it meets their professional and vocational 
    needs, the NTA Portal hopes to generate maximum business and 
    vocational interest of Nigerians across all ages in things Nigerian
    "
Rufai said the portal offers free classified advertisements, 
    digital media consultancy for such as w design and hosting, 
    including high end digital age deliveries as web broadcast, and 
    global SMS Broadcast.
Explaning further, Rufai 
    said the Portal will for example, stream live broadcasts of Annual 
    general meetings of Nigerian 
    companise such that share holders of such businesses can be 
    part of such meetings even when they are outside the country.
A companys listing and business directory is also available 
    online for direct update by any business owner, just as a schools 
    and educational institutions listing. He said verification of such 
    data will be done in partnership with the burgeoning private 
    national databank, The Nation Databank which will also publish the 
    data on its monthly free public video and data discs.
The Nigerian Television Authority NTA Lagos Channel 10, 
    originated as the Nigeria Television Service (NTS) Lagos. Later, it 
    was renamed NBC TV Lagos in October 1976 and in April 1977, it was 
    again renamed NTA, Lagos.
In January, 1978 the station was renamed NTA Channel 10, Lagos, 
    and made one of the constituent stations of the new South western 
    broadcast zone of the national 
    televison broadcast network. The current NTA Lagos, under 
    the Lagos Zonal Centre, was born of the old NTA Lagos in the 
    2007.
The NTA Lagos internet portal project, tagged Beyond 
    Braodcasting, was initiated 
    under the former general manager of the television station Mrs. Elizabeth Iyabosola Aina Scott, now the zonal director of the 
    national television network in Ibadan. Her successor, Mr. 
    Sunday Olaitan Owolabi who took over just last May, saw the project 
    to fruition.
The President of the Association of Telecommunications Companies 
    of Nigeria, Dr. Emmanuel Ekuwem, at the launch of the portal 
    praised the management of the NTA not just for the launch of the 
    project, but for the fact that two administrations have seamlessly 
    seen a project so technical through, in such a short time.
Dr. Ekuwem promised the support of the 
    telecommunciations 
    industry for the new portal, even if only to ensure that " the 
    obviously very technically capable succeeding generation of 
    Nigerian communications technology specialists have a good 
    landing".
To put to nought, fears of a possible death of the project, 
    Dr. Ekuwem advised NTA to support the project in every way 
    possible, since "it is obvious the young men and women 
    involved in the conceptualisation and execution of the project, 
    know what they are doing"
The General Manager of the station promised to ensure the 
    support of the management fo the NTA for the project at all time, 
    since it was obvious that the project itself has the potential to 
    meet some of the cardinal objectives of the granting autonomy to 
    NTA stations in some aspects of their operations.
Television broadcast via the internet is expected to draw more 
    audience than traditional 
    televbision broadcast mainly because to broadcast 
    television content on the internet does not need that substantial 
    capital outlay needed for tradition television broadcast.
At the lower end, a handful of professional and even 
    non-professional journalists, with access to even a basic camcorder 
    and internet access, can maintain a broadcast of video clips they 
    recorded or or gathered together 
    and edited. A few minutes voice recording of a commentary on the 
    videos is all that it takes before such 
    recordingd are sent on to the 
    internet through the same internet service provider used for access 
    to the world wide web.
At the higher end, even established television stations like the 
    NTA, will not need the whole gamut of transmitters and other heavy 
    equipment to broadcast to the internet. All that is needed is an 
    internet connection, even as is usd 
    for email access. The station’s broadcast are just streamed into a 
    computer connected to the internet and the whole world can access 
    the television broadcast by merely accessing the website address of 
    the broadcasting station.
Also, with almost two billion people now having 
    internet-access-ready GSM phone handsets and public power 
    challenges across most 
    devoping countries of the world, the reality today is that 
    internet television broadcasts will win more followership that the 
    conventional.
Incidentally, even as television broadcast prepares to go fully 
    digital worldwide by 2015, the number of small-sized television 
    stations across the world, will obviously increase, as the need for 
    analogue transmitters, which demand 
    licencing would have become unnecessary.
