MWEB Introduces HN 7740S with VoIP
MWEB Nigeria has introduced another innovation, the new Hughes 
    HN 7740S modem to the Nigerian market.
A statement made available to THISDAY disclosed that the Hughes 
    HN 7740s modem is a high-performance broadband satellite router 
    with many technologically advanced features including Voice over 
    Internet Protocol (VoIP), support broadband over satellite data 
    capabilities and advanced compression techniques to ensure optimal 
    data transmission.
Another key feature of the HN 7740S modem is that it is highly 
    resilient to changing weather conditions automatically adapting to 
    conditions to ensure optimal performance regardless of weather 
    conditions.
MWEB Nigeria VSAT Manager, Dotun Faseru said “The HN 7740S 
    enables applications such as Telephony connectivity for remote 
    branch offices, VOIP services for small to medium enterprise, with 
    combined payphone and internet connectivity, High speed 
    internet/intranet access, Video services including remote site 
    security monitoring, diverse satellite backup of primary broadband 
    access, interactive distance education with two-way VOIP 
    connectivity and real time multimedia streaming and large file 
    content distribution”.
The HNS DW7740DVB-S2 modem used by MWEB is VOIP ready and comes 
    with two useable voice ports, therefore no additional Voice 
    Appliance equipment will be required, unless the customer requires 
    more than two iWay VOIP telephone lines, over the PingTone 
    platform.
MWEB stressed that it has competitively positioned this new 
    product against other VoIP service providers and reiterates that 
    its VoIP service is cost efficient and affordable to large 
    corporate customers and small business users. It enables a clear 
    quality voice call through its QoS function, and guarantees enough 
    bandwidth for its voice channel on a dedicated bandwidth.
It also provides unsurpassed performance for even the most 
    bandwidth – intensive applications, allowing both voice and data 
    applications to work seamless with each other over the same 
    satellite connection.
The HN 7740S has the flexibility to handle a wide range business 
    IP Networking requirements for large scale businesses, with the 
    support of two simultaneous LAN subnets and two-wire simultaneous 
    foreign exchange subscriber (FXS) analog voice ports; thus allowing 
    for a clear and quality voice call.
MWEB Nigeria’s NOC has an inbuilt Adaptive Coding Modulation 
    (ACM) on the outbound channel to allow it gain significant 
    bandwidth efficiencies and provide high availability services as 
    well, especially during unfavorable weather conditions. Once MWEB’s 
    NOC sense a signal degration on the modem it sends more power to 
    the modem automatically so as not to lose the connection and as 
    such MWEB’s clients’ would still be working optimally during 
    rainstorms; thus providing customers with unsurpassed network 
    connectivity throughout the day.
MWEB Nigeria GM John Ugbe said “Customers can now receive 
    incoming calls from any voice network including fixed telephone 
    lines and GSM lines. This will also enable our business customers 
    to send facsimile (fax) documents using conventional fax equipment 
    on the iWay VOIP line making business efficiencies smoother. Each 
    line activated on iWayVAP (voice appliance) will be assigned a 
    number and all calls originated from iWayVAP will display the 
    caller’s identity to enable customers to see beforehand who is 
    calling them”, he concluded.
