Microsoft releases free anti-virus software
As Users and Security Experts Give it a pass mark 
    Competitors criticise the product
Microsoft Corporation has released an antivirus software named 
    Microsoft Security Essentials. The software, which was released 
    last week been downloaded by numerous windows users across the 
    globe.
The product, according to Microsoft, is free and can be 
    downloaded by anyone using Security Essentials’ website. Versions 
    are available for Windows XP, Vista, and 7. Also, no registration 
    is required and the software can be installed on any number of PCs 
    without restrictions.
Security Essentials which was launched last Tuesday, is basic 
    anti-virus and anti-spyware software that Microsoft touts as 
    suitable for users who can’t, or won’t, pay for security.
Microsoft Security Essentials provides real-time protection that 
    uses behaviour monitoring and reputation services to help identify 
    the malicious software as soon as it emerges in the ecosystem and 
    then uses the Dynamic Signature Service to make the newest 
    definitions available virtually real-time, without having to wait 
    for the next signature download.
Microsoft Security Essentials as learnt by PC User to 
    User takes over from Windows Live OneCare, a commercial 
    offering that was phased out in June and it focuses on something 
    that is much broader in its offering.
Although Security Essentials is free, it will not be installed 
    with Windows or provided as an automatic update.
Microsoft Security Essentials runs quietly and efficiently in 
    the background so that you are free to use your Windows-based PC as 
    desired, without interruptions or long computer wait times.
Since the release of the software, several security testing 
    firms have put up tests, to ascertain the potency of the software. 
    One of such was av-test.org.
To check static known malware, AV-Test pitted Security 
    Essentials against the most recent WildList, a sampling of 3,732 
    viruses and other threats. Microsoft’s product successfully 
    detected and blocked all of the samples in both manual and active 
    scanning.
Microsoft will block users running counterfeit copies of Windows 
    from installing the free Security Essentials antivirus software. 
    All efforts, according to, Microsoft would be put in place to check 
    the activities of the pirates.
During installation, users will be asked to validate Windows 
    running on your PC to make sure that it’s genuine. Genuine Windows 
    is the umbrella label for several of the company’s anti-piracy 
    technologies, including product activation and the often-criticized 
    validation and notification components, which regularly determine 
    whether the copy of Windows running on a PC is legitimate.
However, other anti malware companies, especially
Symantec
has continued reacting to the release of MSE. They believe 
    Microsoft was not known for security and that their newly release 
    antivirus software might not stand the test of time. Symantec 
    referred to the Security Essentials as a rerun of Windows Live One 
    Care, security software from Microsoft, which is now defunct.
Symantec also holds that MSE was made pro bono by Microsoft 
    because of its inferior quality and incapability of fighting 
    viruses to the finish.
As to the rationale of offering MSE at no cost, Microsoft 
    explained that that was done because they believe many of their 
    customers worldwide that do not have up-to-date protection either 
    because they cannot afford it, are concerned about the impact the 
    suites will have on the performance of their PCs, or because they 
    simply do not realize their antivirus software is not up to 
    date.
The software is still available for download on the Microsoft 
    website and from others websites that have the link of Microsoft, 
    and other that have been authorised to do so.
