Nokia unveils mobile computer
IN response to customers continued yearning for improved and 
    quality products, world leading manufacturer of mobile phone, Nokia 
    last week unveiled a mobile computer, Nokia N97 mini in Lagos.
The N97 Mini, which is expected to hit Nigerian market next 
    month is targeted at users who want something more pocket-friendly 
    when they’re on the go, and comes with stainless steel cues and 
    sleek white casing.
It also comes in colourful device and is cheap and affordable 
    for end users.Unveiling the product 
    last week in Lagos, head of Nokia research centre, Henry Tirri said 
    “ customers feedback made us to come with Nokia N97 mini. We have 
    always been responsive to our customers’ demand.”
He described the mobile phone as a software upgrade and a 
    convergence of everything Nokia is doing with technology, capable 
    of serving the dual purpose of mobile phone and laptop everywhere 
    the user may be, adding that the computing power and 
    accessaries of the phones 
    , makes it unique among other 
    phone with similar features.
“With about 32 Gigabytes and increased memory, what we are 
    trying to do with N97 mini is to make it more portable and 
    convenience to the user. And the peculiarity of the product is 
    that, you can customize the screen and connect to LCD screen and 
    Laser Jet printer with ease.
The N97 Mini has a fully customizable home screen, a tilting 
    3.2″ wide-screen touch display, symbian operating system, 
    full Qwerty keyboard and 8Gigabyte, 
    or 24 Gigabyte expandable, memory.
With the new N97 mini, users will be able to browse the web 
    quickly and effortlessly through a superfast 3G or Wi-Fi 
    connection. In addition, users can seamlessly connect with their 
    friends and favorite online services and as well receive live feeds 
    from their favorite social networking sites and news services.
The N97 mini in white features also come with a 5-megapixel 
    camera with Carl Zeiss Optics and dual LED flash, DVD-quality video 
    recording, music player and email capabilities. The upgraded 
    browser offers lifecasting. An application to gain direct access to 
    social networking sites from the home screen. It is also possible 
    to navigate from A to B with ease through the A-GPS receiver and 
    Nokia Maps. In addition, the user is given access to a huge range 
    of content from the Ovi Store. It specializes in mobile phones and 
    related product areas like laptops, mobile broadband and 
    accessories.
According to Tirri, the phone has six games on the board and 
    comes in a strong and rugged casing to resist every adverse 
    situation.
Nokia Executive Commercial manager, Ngozi Anene who warned 
    buyers from patronising roadside sellers said only authorised 
    dealers in major market have access to the new phone, urging them 
    to always look out for the IBM number of the phone before 
    purchase.
“We are amazed that fake brands are already in the market, to 
    avoid falling victim of fake dealers, my advice to users is to 
    avoid buying from road side sellers but buy from only authorized 
    dealers.” she said.
