UNIFIED SMART HOME : 
    ITUapproves G.hn as standard for wired home 
    networking
IT seems as if the International Telecommunications Union, ITU, 
    is bench marking the growth of world technological improvements 
    with activities in the Nigeria ICT sector. This is as the world 
    telecom body, at the weekend, approved new standard tagged G.hn, for wiring new digital offerings like High Definition TV 
    (HDTV) and digital Internet Protocol TV (IPTV) in homes.
The cutting-edge technical standard, according to ITU, would 
    usher in new era in smart home networking systems and applications. 
    The standard, is expected to enable service providers to deploy 
    High Definition TV (HDTV) and digital Internet Protocol TV (IPTV) 
    among others at more cost effective platforms.
It will also allow consumer electronics manufacturers to 
    seamlessly network all types of home entertainment, home automation 
    and home security products, and greatly simplify consumers’ 
    purchasing and installation processes.
G.hn-compliant devices will be capable of handling 
    high-bandwidth rich multimedia content at speeds of up to 1 Gbit/s 
    over household wiring options, including coaxial cable and standard 
    phone and power lines.
This development reinforces the statement made by the ITU 
    secretary General, Dr Hamadoun Toure, recently in Abuja Nigeria, 
    that in the next five to seven years, all homes in Africa may have 
    been connected with cheap broadband and internet access as well as 
    other new offering like HDTV and IPTV.
It also reinforces the business foresight of notable Nigerian 
    business men and women like, Chief Raymond Dokpesi who flagged off 
    his PayTV system, DAARSAT, on the platform of High definition TV 
    when existing operators were yet to migrate to the platform, 
    Chairman of Globacom, Otunba Mike Adenuga jr, and CEO of MainOne, 
    Mrs Funke Opeke, who respectively, invested heavily in multimillion 
    dollar submarine fibre cable systems, knowing that it is where the 
    future of world broadband connections is heading to.
Both landed their projects in Lagos Nigeria recently from UK and 
    Portugal respectively, signalling the take of cheap connection of 
    new offerings and services to homes in Nigeria, West Africa and 
    indeed the entire African continent.
So for people in Africa, the ITU new standard would be a boost 
    as it promises to deliver many times the throughput of existing 
    wireless and wired technologies.
Approval of the new standard will allow manufacturers of 
    networked home devices – set-top boxes, residential gateways, 
    computers, audio systems, DVD players, household appliances and any 
    other device that might be connected to a network – to confidently 
    move forward with their R&D programmes and rapidly bring 
    products to market. Experts predict that the first chipsets 
    employing G.hn will be available in early 2010.
According to the Director of ITU’s Telecommunication 
    Standardization Bureau, Mr Malcolm Johnson, “G.hn is a 
    technology that gives new use to the cabling most people already 
    have in their homes. The remarkable array of applications that it 
    will enable includes energy efficient smart appliances, home 
    automation and telemedicine devices. The sheer weight of industry 
    support behind this innovation is testament to the extraordinary 
    potential of this standard to transform home 
    networking.”
The physical layer and architecture portion of the standard were 
    approved by ITU-T Study Group 15 on October 9. The data link layer 
    of the new standard is expected to garner final approval at the 
    group’s next meeting in May 2010.
The Home Grid Forum, a group set up to promote G.hn, is 
    developing a certification programme together with the Broadband 
    Forum that will aid semiconductor and systems manufacturers in 
    building and bringing standards-compliant products to market, with 
    products that fully conform to the G.hn standard bearing the 
    HomeGrid-certified logo.
Also agreed at the recent ITU-T Study Group 15 meeting was a new 
    standard that focuses on coexistence between G.hn-based 
    products and those using other technologies. Known as G.9972, the standard describes the process by which G.hn 
    devices will work with power line devices that use technologies 
    such as IEEE P1901. In addition, experts say that they will develop 
    extensions to G.hn to support SmartGrid applications.
