How to Get Your Own Website (5)
These days, it is much easier to create a website than it used 
    to be. In general, website-creation programs are much simpler to 
    use - and you also have the option of signing up with an online web 
    host with easy-to-use page creation tools.
But the biggest change has to be the advent of the blog.
“Blog” is short for ‘web log’. Blogs 
    started off as a way for people to create an online diary. Bloggers 
    would simply log on, tap out a paragraph or two giving their 
    thoughts on life and the universe (and everything in between); 
    click ‘publish’ and that was that. 
    Their words were live on the Internet for anyone to see. The big 
    appeal of a blog was that it was interactive: readers were welcome 
    to add a comment on any post, with a link back to their own blog or 
    website.
Gradually, bloggers started to want more. They wanted easy ways 
    to upload photos, and extra pages on the site - just like a 
    ‘real’ website. They wanted a range of 
    themes, to better express their personality or business.
Programmers everywhere came to the party, particularly with 
    WordPress, a well-known open source. Now, if you want a 
    website/blog, it’s possible to:
* Sign up with a web host with CPanel for a low monthly fee
    
* Install WordPress with just a few clicks of the mouse, using 
    Fantastico on your website’s CPanel
* Either use one of the pre-installed themes, or browse the 
    various themes available at WordPress (and on many other sites) to 
    choose one that suits your personality or business
    
* Upload the theme you want to the wp_content folder, using a 
    simple FTP program (such as WS_FTP or Cute FTP)
    
* Start posting your articles or comments
    
* Add extra pages to your site (if you want to)
    
Now that you can add separate pages to blogs - just as you can 
    with a standard website - many people are turning to them as their 
    preferred way of building a website. By using various plugins, it’s 
    possible to do pretty well anything you want.
=== What Are “Plugins”? ===
Plugins are extra features available for your blog to make your 
    life easier. You can get plugins, for example, that will:
- help you block spam
- make it easy to upload and sort your photos
- ping the search engines so they know when you’ve added new 
    content
- insert Adsense blocks so you can earn money from your blog
There are quite a number of plugins available now - take some 
    time to find out what they will do.
=== Help With Using Wordpress ===
While Wordpress is not the only blog software available, it is 
    an excellent choice because (a) it’s free; (b) it’s relatively easy 
    to use; (c) it’s open-source, and therefore has a lot of people 
    working on it constantly to make it better, and (d) there are quite 
    a few ‘how to’ sites on the Internet 
    showing you how to make the most of your Wordpress blog.
One of them is Guido Stiehle (”The Jungle Marketer”) who offers 
    an excellent free tutorial (with video tutorials) that will show 
    you, step by step, how to set up and use your blog. You can find 
    other providers by simply typing ‘how to use 
    Wordpress’ into a search engine.
Spend an hour or two browsing, and you’ll see why a blog is a 
    very viable option for establishing your presence on the 
    Internet.
