Benefits of Reviving Fixed Line Network
Efem Nkanga in this 
    report writes about current efforts by operators in the telecoms 
    industry, which is 97 per cent mobile, to enable a robust fixed 
    landline network in the country to ease pressure on the mobile 
    platform
Lately, Nigerian Global System for Mobile communication (GSM) 
    operators have commenced operations to enable a fixed line offering 
    that will ease pressure on the mobile platform. This was obviously 
    in response to calls by stakeholders that a balance needs to be 
    created to correct the 97 per cent ratio imbalance and strangle 
    hold of mobile lines that has left only three per cent for 
    landlines.
The calls for fixed lines came after Nigerians were compelled to 
    experience poor quality services that took the shine off the GSM. 
    This scenario made it a common occurrence to see Nigerians 
    clutching three mobile phones - all mobile at a go in a bid to 
    ensure that they communicate with their loved ones and business 
    associates 24 hours a day and 7 days a week.
This multiple phone syndrome is currently so pervasive that not 
    only businessmen and government officials carry multiple phones but 
    students as well. Nigerians, ever so versatile, adopted this option 
    to beat the downtimes experienced when service quality offered by 
    operators is nothing to write home about. Thus most people just buy 
    the Sim cards of the three major GSM operators in the country and 
    hook up in the hope that all three will not experience downtimes at 
    the same time and that they can still get access to another 
    operator if any of the other two is down.
In a bid to ease pressure on the mobile platform, two of the 
    three major operators have set in motion their own fixed line 
    platforms so that Nigerians will not just make calls on the go, all 
    the time but will have the option of using their fixed lines at 
    home or in their offices like is done in developed countries where 
    the mobile phone is used on the move. People in this jurisdiction 
    use fixed lines only when they are either at home or at their 
    offices.
The mobile is the only platform a lot of Nigerians use hence the 
    fixed lines have not been as popular as the mobile to Nigerians. 
    This is because prior to the introduction of the GSM, Nigeria did 
    not have a robust fixed network infrastructure as is the case in 
    other developed countries. Thus, Nigerians who had been starved of 
    quality communications embraced mobile technology with open arms 
    and many poor Nigerians were able to communicate with one another 
    until poor services started eroding the joy of the people.
However, with calls for a robust fixed line network to combat 
    poor services, the Second National telecoms operator, Globacom, 
    recently commenced commercial service on its fixed lines operation 
    by connecting in the first instance, corporate subscribers in Lagos 
    and Abuja, while the commencement of fixed line services to 
    individuals in key cities around the country is set to begin in a 
    few weeks. It already has its fixed switches ready in Lagos, Abuja, 
    Kano, Port Harcourt, Benin and Ibadan.
The Acting Chief Operating Officer of Glo Broad Access, the 
    fixed line arm of Globacom, Mr. Martin Olowonihi, disclosed 
    that copper cable laying around Lagos was nearing completion to 
    facilitate and make available fixed wired services to more 
    people.
Olowonihi emphasised that over 50,000 lines will be available in 
    Lagos alone, while 12 other cities were set to benefit because the 
    copper works for the metro rings have reached advanced stages.
MTN, the Nigerian telecoms giant also began the unveiling of its 
    fixed lines network in Ibadan a few days ago. The MTN fixed line 
    service called HyConnect according to the Chief Enterprise 
    Solutions Officer, Mr Derek Appiah, will provide Nigerians a golden 
    opportunity to have true fixed services running on fibre optic 
    technology in their homes and offices.
He said MTN HyConnect lines are bundled with the internet at 
    broadband speeds of between 64kbps and 2mbps. He added this is the 
    first time that any telephone line in Nigeria is able to deliver as 
    much speed.
He said MTN HyConnect is already running in Lagos, Abuja and 
    Port Harcourt while efforts are ongoing to take the service to Aba, 
    Kano, Calabar, Kaduna, Warri, Ilorin, Onitsha, Benin, Jos and 
    Maiduguri among many other Nigerian cities.
He added for emphasis that subscribers of MTN HyConnect will be 
    able to enjoy features like peerless call completion rate, call 
    hunting, call barring, call conferencing/call forwarding, caller 
    line identification, call waiting and fax connectivity etc as well 
    as quality of voice calls and call rates as low as N5 for intra 
    network calls.
Though the poor quality of service experienced recently led to 
    stakeholders to call for Nigerians to embrace the fixed lines 
    alternative offered by CDMA operators as a way of reducing pressure 
    on mobile networks and restoring quality of service. However, the 
    introduction of the unified licensing regime by the Nigerian 
    Communications Commission NCC in 2006 opened the floodgates of 
    opportunities for operators.
The Unified licensing regime ensures that multiple services such 
    as mobile telephony, fixed telephony, internet, broadband, long 
    distance services, etc can be provided by a single service 
    provider. The regime allows competing telecom operators and service 
    providers to rapidly deploy new services to meet demand without 
    having to seek new licenses.
The unified Licensing regime also encourages innovation, reduce 
    investment risk and facilitate competition, by giving operators a 
    platform to provide services of their choice to meet market 
    demands.
With the MTN and Globacom effectively deploying their license 
    and Celtel now Zain expected to also commence its fixed line 
    network in addition to the expected commencement of the fixed line 
    operations of NITEL, Nigerian subscribers stand to benefit from the 
    new innovations that will be enabled as operators compete to retain 
    the loyalty and patronage of subscribers.
Though the number of subscribers recorded on the fixed line 
    platform is a far cry from that of the over 50 million recorded on 
    the mobile platform, it is a start in the right direction and is 
    sure to in a few years to be expanded to accommodate more 
    subscribers and narrow down the margin set by the mobile lines.
The ease of pressure on the mobile platform is desirable 
    especially in the light of fears expressed recently that too much 
    use of mobile phones can cause cancer. So the fixed line option 
    apart from helping to deal with quality of service challenges also 
    has health benefits as reduced usage of mobile phones will help in 
    protecting the health of Nigerians in the long run.
