Solar power: filling the missing gap
Solar power is gradually taking a major slot among the 
    nation’s energy alternatives. DANIEL ESSIET looks at opportunities 
    provided by the energy source described as one of the cheapest 
    means of power generation.
As the economy groans under government’s failed promise to 
    improve power supply,a lot of challenges have been thrown before 
    individuals and corporate organisations on how to manage power 
    supply successfully amidst the crisis.
Nigerians are short of electricity and the power stations have 
    literally fallen apart, declining in capacity. As a result 
    ,businesses choke from the challenges 
    of erratic power supply.
For the Deputy Director, Web power Continental Services, Mr Edun 
    Olamide, the situation should convince Nigerians not to cling to 
    electricity utilities that have stopped generating constant power 
    supply.
He is of the opinion that 
    erractic power supply will impede the efforts of Nigerian 
    businesses to excel and deliver results.
Since the cost of energy constitutes a drain on resources, the 
    expert said revamping power supply is now the most urgent threat 
    facing individuals and organisations.
Olamide is among experts who believe the power situation would 
    never improve as quickly as it was in the past.
He said solar power has the potential to offer low cost 
    electricity and is evolving at a fast pace with new innovations.
Above all,Nigerians would no 
    longer be tied to Power Holding Company of Nigeria 
    (PHCN).
As the business environment has changed radically ,and becomes 
    more fast-paced,the delivery of 
    energy supply has become more crucial.
In the present circumstance,the 
    energy expert said solar power is a better fit as it will help to 
    reduce operational costs and boost competitiveness.
He said that the government’s support, his company is ready to 
    harness energy from the sun, and other renewable resources to shore 
    up the nation’s electricity supply.
For him, one who can’t afford to install commercial solar power 
    panels to power the entire house can begin using small solar power 
    panels and reduce power consumption by the smallest of margins.
With better technology in the market, the web entrepreneur said 
    solar systems can plug the power supply gap in the nation.
Going by the dwindling situation,solar-power system installations could generate millions 
    in revenue in 2004 and sales is likely to nearly triple by 2020.
The solar expert said there is increased importation of 
    photovoltaic cells and modules, used in rooftop panels.
He said the industry holds more promises for those who want to 
    parlay their expertise into rewarding career opportunity 
    .Though there are two basic concepts 
    for tapping the sun’s energy, Olamide said he has perfected the 
    photo voltaic approach where, a 
    semiconductor — typically silicon — absorbs the photons streaming 
    from the sun and reacts by giving off a flow of electrons, or 
    electricity.
Solar panels,he said can empower 
    many things in the house; but there is a need for energy assessment 
    to enable the solar power professional to configure the home 
    system.
The size of the solar system to be deployed depends on the 
    number of appliances or devices requiring power within a room. He 
    said the size of the solar array, other system components and the 
    battery reserve capacity is dictated by the electrical usage of the 
    property, the amount of reserve for periods of little or no sun and 
    the climatology of the area.The other area is the battery reserve 
    capacity and additional controls required in the system.
According to him, the cost depends on whether the system is 
    completely off-grid.
He said a simple solar power system goes for N80,000 
    ,consisting solar panel, inverter, 
    conductor and battery and is simple in nature.
He advised that the system should be installed only by 
    individuals who have training or previous experience in installing 
    systems.
In Nigeria, solar power supplies still constitute a tiny share 
    of energy consumed but prospects for growth is great.The challenge 
    is making solar panels become affordable for homes and offices.
The high cost of installing solar electric systems have in the 
    past kept many homeowners from investing in them.
He said though the cost for installing solar energy may appear 
    expensive it will pay off at the end of the day. According to him, 
    the system would pay for it self 
    in 10 to 15 years.
He said the company is also assembling the solar panels in 
    Nigeria to make it easy for people to acquire solar system 
    
On the average, solar power would help Nigerians conserve 
    energy.
According to him, there are appliances, lights, computers that 
    can be turned off or on low to conserve energy.
Solar panels produce electricity only when the sun is shining, 
    but that may not be when the customer needs it. The solution is to 
    store the surplus electricity in batteries.
He said using a hybrid system is important where there is no sun 
    or the solar panels do not have the capacity to supply the 
    building.
According to Olamide,using a 
    hybrid system enables the user to connect the system to the public 
    grid.
The power supplied, would be stored in batteries and used after 
    public light goes off.
There panels are now portable solar power for electronic items 
    like mobile phones, PDA,ipods, 
    laptops and for charging car batteries. They are meant for people 
    who are always on the move. He said solar battery chargers simply 
    need sunlight to start charging the batteries and can be positioned 
    to catch the most rays.
He said a minimum of about two hours, depending on the type of 
    battery being charged, how much charge they have left in them and 
    the strength and consistency of the sunlight.
Portable solar power is more advanced with a wide variety of 
    options available to power pretty much anything.
On a small scale, portable solar power is available for 
    electronic items such as mobile phones, PDAs and iPods.
On a slightly larger scale, he said one can buy portable solar 
    power panels suitable for charging laptops or car batteries.
Olamide aims to train many Nigerians to place solar energy 
    systems in 120 million residential homes in Nigeria.
He said his training is so simple that other professionals apart 
    from, home builders, electricians, 
    welders, roofers, engineers, can be efficiently transitioned into 
    the burgeoning business of solar energy.
Presently, the company runs three-day installation training.
