The future is …. Convergence
In 2006 when the VoIP Africa Forum held in Lagos to discuss a 
    very dicey theme in the industry, everyone who should know agreed 
    that the industry is in transition and that the future of the 
    industry will be VoIP (Voice over Internet Protocol). The regulator 
    in the person of Engineer Ernest Ndukwe did not mince words. VoIP 
    would become the industry’s vista for doing the seemingly 
    impossible. It would challenge the old order of doing things, make 
    giants of minnows and make dinosaurs of incumbents who refused to 
    adapt to change.
But even then, the most conservative and less optimistic in the 
    industry believed VoIP was only an abbreviation of something more 
    than it. VoIP was merely signifying an unfolding reality that would 
    be much more revolutionary than the transmission of voice packets 
    over soft switches. The industry saw EoIP coming – Everything over 
    IP. It is here and perforce, the age of convergence.
Enter convergence. And everything collapses into one pipe 
    carrying content of voice, video, data, and everything conceivable 
    to bring timeless communication to the marriage of media and 
    content. As long there is bandwidth and there is soft switch, 
    content will flow in high speed once unfathomed.
Virtually all the 21st century compliant networks have the 
    ability to provide a range of services over a single network: 
    consider voice, video, and Internet data all coming down your cable 
    television link; or all these services including 
    broadcast\television signals coming to your home through the 
    wireless telephone link of Multilinks or Starcomms.
Everything has changed. Well! Everything except several 
    incumbents in the old order that dominated the scene in the pre 
    liberalization era and the new private sector monster operators in 
    the pre VoIP age: The new incumbents that turned most of the PTTs 
    to dinosaurs by their massive rollout, buildout speed, high level 
    of innovativeness that ushered in new level of competitions. With 
    massive expenditure on traditional infrastructures, the stakes for 
    market dominance and dividends are higher; VoIP meant trouble and 
    the transition to convergence naturally inspires fear and 
    excitement.
But convergence is here. Consider this expert viewpoint: 
    "ICT convergence is part of our daily lives and impacts 
    everything we do; we might not even notice it anymore. But, 
    convergence is more than just voice over IP (VoIP), Internet 
    Protocol television (IPTV) and fixed wireless or mobile content. 
    Convergence is about IP everywhere. Next-generation convergence 
    involves a series of ongoing discontinuities in technology, 
    infrastructure, consumer behaviour and competitive dynamics that 
    are creating new companies and business models, and are redefining 
    a wide range of industries, including media, telecoms and 
    IT."
VoIP is already carrying the bulk of Nigeria’s international 
    voice traffic and increasingly playing a key role in consumers 
    changing behaviour. Consumers attitude to voice services has 
    cahnged largely influenced by 
    the growing aceptance of 
    Skype, Google and Yahoo voice services among others. Many corporate 
    organsiations are 
    encouraging a greater use of Skype and other Internet-based voice 
    applications to save on talk budget.
The annual corporate budget for talk is shrinking fast. Smart 
    organisations will rather use one single pipe for their 
    video-conferencing, transmission of heavy documents, and voice 
    communication than pay dif
