Windows 7 to revolutionise computer usage
The introduction of Windows 7 by the world’s leading 
    software producer, Microsoft Corporation, is to herald a revolution 
    in the usage of computers. CHUKS UDO OKONTA 
    examines its features and users’ expectations.
The launch of the long- 
    awaited Windows 7 last week, by Microsoft Corporation, 
    signifies another feat in the Information and Communications 
    Technology (ICT) sector.
The windows, which replace Vista, is said to be designed to meet 
    the trends in the communications sector and enhance human 
    productivity.
According to a recent survey, the production of the computer is 
    said to be the best human invention. To sustain this feat, 
    Microsoft Corporation, has continued to research and develop 
    devices that will aid and promote human existence.
Windows 7 which has the catch phrase: ‘Your PC simplified’, will 
    enable users to instantly locate and open virtually any file on 
    their computers - from documents to emails songs, right from the 
    start menu with just typing a word or two with the windows 
    search.
It also enables users open files and get around their computers 
    fast with the improved taskbar, which helps to pin programmes used 
    often to the taskbar, so that they can be located with a click. 
    Files used regularly are opened without hassles with jump list, 
    lots of open programmes; documents and browser windows are managed 
    easily with thumbnail and full-screen previews of open windows, 
    resize and organise open windows – arranging two windows exactly 
    side-by-side by dragging them to opposite sides of the computer 
    screen and more.
Country Manager, Microsoft Nigeria, Mr. Emmanuel Onyeje, 
    at the launch of the window in Lagos, said that with Windows 7, 
    Microsoft has taken the level of computer improvement higher. He 
    added that one billion windows users across the globe gave 
    Microsoft a great opportunity to listen and learn how to develop 
    the windows.
Said he: "Windows 7 represent years of in-depth listening 
    to our customers and partners across the globe and is the 
    well-researched and well-planned windows released ever.
"Eight million people took part in our Windows 7 beta 
    testing programme worldwide, including windows users across the 
    African continent. This inputs and feedbacks, helped shape Windows 
    7 into a product people really wanted.
"In fact 91 per cent of Windows 7 release candidates’ 
    testers told us they would recommend Windows 7 to others."
He said the windows have features for everybody; adding that for 
    the customer, Microsoft designed the windows to be more reliable, 
    responsive and to make the work of customers easy.
"For small and medium size businesses – Windows 7 is the 
    best operating system for work, whether people from company office, 
    from home or on the go. Windows 7 works the way you want, and 
    enable you to get more work done and keeps your work safe.
"For enterprises, Windows 7 was designed to meet the 
    rigorous demand of the enterprise, it makes users productive 
    anywhere, delivers enhanced security and control to reduce risk and 
    streamline personal computer manageability to reduce cost," he 
    added.
He said that Microsoft has developed different versions of 
    Windows 7 to cater to the different things people want to do with 
    their computers.
Onyeje said: "Windows 7 Starter and Windows 7 Home Basic – 
    ideal for first-time PC buyer or those looking for a PC loaded with 
    windows 7 on a budget.
"Windows 7 Home Premium – the best edition for consumers, 
    it provides the best gaming and entertainment experience.
"Windows 7 Professional is ideal for the small and medium 
    size business users and has all the features you need to do your 
    job, along with all the great media and entertainment features of 
    Windows 7 Home Premium.
"Windows 7 Enterprise and Windows 7 Ultimate are the most 
    versatile and powerful editions and designed to address the needs 
    of both enterprise customers and consumers who run high end 
    computers and want every features of windows 7."
He said the windows are available in 33 languages including 
    English, French and Portuguese, adding that Microsoft is working to 
    ensure the windows are available in African languages including 
    Igbo, Hausa and Yoruba within 18 to 24 months.
He said that the Windows will be available in all Microsoft’s 
    certified outlets in Nigeria from mid November.
Microsoft’s Nigeria Technology Manager, Mr. Oluwale 
    Olukodano, said the windows cater for productivity, security, 
    safety and enterprise, adding that data are effectively secured in 
    the windows.
"Windows 7 Internet explorer 8 makes using the web faster, 
    safer and easier than ever.
"The SmartScreen filter helps protect you from phishing 
    scams and from web sites that attempt to down load malicious 
    software to your computer and the in private browsing helps 
    protects your privacy so that there would be no record of your 
    browsing activity after you have closed the browser," he 
    said.
Chief Information Officer, First City Monument Bank, Mr. 
    Olayinka Oni, said: "Windows 7 is an excellent operating 
    system. We are moving every one of our organisation to it. It is 
    fast, less resources hungry, runs smoothly and has no 
    issues."
Chief Operating Officer, Signal Alliance, Mr. Adanma 
    Onuegbu, said: "Windows 7 is beautiful. It is very fast and 
    easy to use. There are not too many processes to get what you want 
    done. I am so excited about it, and we are already recommending it 
    to our customers. It is a great improvement on the previous 
    windows."
How to tell whether your PC can handle Windows 7.
Here are few handy tips before buying and installing Windows 
    7:
•If your current PC is running Windows Vista then it can also 
    handle Windows 7, no problem.
• If you’re running Windows XP, you need to see if your existing 
    hardware can handle Windows 7. Minimum specs for Windows 7 are: 1 
    gigahertz (GHz) or faster 32-bit (x86) or 64-bit (x64) processor; 1 
    gigabyte (GB) RAM (32-bit) or 2 GB RAM (64-bit); 16 GB available 
    hard disk space (32-bit) or 20 GB (64-bit); DirectX 9 graphics 
    device with WDDM 1.0 or higher driver.
•If your computer can handle the upgrade, what about the 
    software you use? The rule of thumb is as follows: If your 
    third-party programs work in Windows Vista now, they’ll work in 
    Windows 7.
The prices of the windows are: Microsoft Windows 7 Home Premium 
    Upgrade, Price: £59.00 (about N14,573).
Microsoft Starter to Home Premium Windows 7, Price: £64.95 (about N16,042.65).
Microsoft Home Premium Full Version Windows 7: Full version 
    comes complete with Options to upgrade your existing XP or Vista 
    operating system to Windows 7 or you can install on a machine that 
    currently has no operating system.
Price: £81.34 about (N20,090.98).
Microsoft Home Premium to Professional Windows 7 Price: £99.95 (about N24,687.65).
Microsoft Home Premium – Ultimate Windows 7 Price 
    :£105.95 (about N26,169.65).
Microsoft Family Pack
Windows 7
Price:£129.99 (about 
    N32,197.53).
Microsoft Professional Full Version Windows 7
Full version comes complete with Options to Upgrade your 
    exsiting XP or Vista operating 
    system to Windows 7 or you can install on a machine that currently 
    has no operating system.
Price:£147.99 (about 
    N36,553.53)
Microsoft Windows 7
Professional Upgrade
Price:£149.99 (about 
    N37,047.53)
Microsoft Windows 7
Ultimate Upgrade
Price:£153.18 (about 
    N37,835.46)
Microsoft Ultimate Full Version
Windows 7
Full version comes complete with Options to Upgrade your 
    exsiting XP or Vista operating 
    system to Windows 7 or you can install on a machine that currently 
    has no operating system.
Price:£159.99 (about 
    N39,517.53).
