Oando introduces e-payment to marketing
Nigeria’s leading oil marketing firm - Oando Marketing Limited 
    (OML), a subsidiary of Oando PLC has announced plans to introduce a 
    new electronic payment solution called ‘PAYDirect’ which will come into operation on 
    October 1, 2009. 
The electronic payment service, the company said, will be 
    powered by InterSwitch to enhance service to customers across its 
    over 500 retail service stations nationwide.  
The company in a statement issued by its Head, Corporate 
    Communications Meka Olowola said: "This initiative was 
    conceptualised from the need to improve product supply chain 
    management and boost the efficiency of the company’s retail 
    outlets, thereby guaranteeing petroleum products availability 
    across all Oando service stations nationwide. 
"PAYDirect is an online real time service targeted mainly 
    at OML’s cash paying dealers nationwide. Once introduced, PAYDirect 
    will drastically reduce the time it takes to confirm payment for 
    products from about 24 hours to a few minutes via instant 
    notification of all payments into participating banks allowing for 
    immediate shipping of products from any of OML’s over 20 fuel and 
    lubricant storage locations direct to the paying customer’s site.  
    
Introduction of the "PAYDirect" solution further 
    reinforces OML’s status as the most operationally efficient player 
    in the downstream sector, having already successfully implemented 
    the Oracle E-business Suite in 2007 as its core operating platform. 
    
This solution will provide the dealers of Oando Marketing the 
    following benefits;  
faster processing and release of products to dealers as a result 
    of immediate tracking of payments, online real-time accounts status 
    and tracking of payments made anywhere across the country, 
    availability of historical reports of transactions for easier 
    reconciliation and elimination of bank confirmation for payments 
    made to any of OML’s accounts.  
Commenting on the initiative, the Chief Operating Officer, OML 
    Mr. Ayo Ajose-Adeogun, said: "As a customer-focused 
    organization, we continually reinvent our processes to ensure 
    excellent service delivery to stakeholders. The PAYDirect solution 
    offers OML a 24-hour reduction in the typical order-to-delivery 
    cycle for all our products regardless of the delivery point.  
"The immediate impact of this is the quick turnaround of 
    our dealers’ investment as well as a confidence boost for our 
    numerous customers in the ability of our stations to meet their 
    petroleum product demands all year round irrespective of 
    geographical location.  
"Once again, we are proud to pioneer this initiative in 
    Nigeria, as we continue to maintain retail market leadership with 
    innovative products and services."  
Oando Marketing also recently broke new ground with another 
    customer value-adding initiative with the launch of Oando 
    Pay-As-U-Gas which involves dispensing of Liquefied Petroleum Gas 
    (LPG) into the customers’ cylinders using a metered pump, right 
    there on the station forecourt. 
The benefits of the Pay-As-U-Gas initiative to customers include 
    flexibility, product integrity, convenience and expert after sales 
    service whilst allowing the customer to retain physical possession 
    of their cylinder. This service is currently obtainable from 
    designated service stations in Lagos, Abuja and Kaduna. 
"Oando Marketing Limited is the nation’s leading oil 
    retailer, with one in every five litres of petroleum products being 
    sold or distributed via Oando’s over 500 retail outlets and 
    strategically located terminals whilst ensuring continuous products 
    supply and availability in Nigeria and the West African sub region 
    including Ghana, Togo and Benin," the statement added. 
