Innoson, Bajaj, Audi, BMW jostle for Auto of the Year 
    Awards
One of the challenges facing the organisers of the Nigerian Auto 
    Media Awards will be deciding which brand to be decorated with the 
    important prize of Motorcycle of the Year award, 
    as well as which car to be bestowed with the prestigious honour of 
    the Premium Luxury Car of the Year.
This was confirmed by a source close to the members of the 
    organising committee who held a crucial meeting last week during 
    which the two categories came up for deliberation.
The Nation
learnt that products of three brands have been 
    nominated for each of the two categories, namely Bajaj, Hajuoe 
    Suzuki and Innoson, for motorcycles; and Audi A8, BMW 7 Series and 
    Mercedes Benz S-Class, for the premium comfort 
    cars.
In terms of luxury, product quality and exceptional performance 
    , these are the cars ahead of the field, while in terms of 
    aftermarket back-up, their dealership – that is, Audi Centre 
    (Stallion Motors); Coscharis Motors for BMW; and Westar 
    Associates/Globe Motors) for Mercedes-Benz – have done very well in 
    giving the products positive brand image.
Interestingly, the cars are among the most endowed automobiles 
    in the whole world, which is why the trio has always been lined up 
    by experts to compare their innovative technologies. On several 
    occasions, their intelligence systems called COMMAND in Benz, and 
    iDrive in the 7 Series, have come up for analytical comparisons.
Speaking with the Chief Executive Officer of Goldcrest 
    Communication, Mr. Frank Okechukwu, assured that the 
    organisers would fair in determining the winners of the two 
    categories as well as the other segments.
Okechukwu whose Goldcrest Communication is partnering with the 
    Guild of Motoring Correspondents in organising the awards and 
    lecture said, all the nominees for the motorcycle award has 
    impressive pedigree.
He conceded that the Motorcycle of the Year 
    award is a ‘race’ which is particularly 
    too close to call.
While Suzuki is almost as old as the history of motorcycle in 
    Nigeria, Bajaj, an Indian brand, has been making very remarkable 
    inroad into the local market in the past couple of years. Ditto for 
    the products of the Nnewi-based Innoson Nigeria Limited, which 
    dominates the eastern market and widely sold in the north, as well 
    as a couple of neighbouring countries?
Innoson is said to have the enviable credit of crashing the 
    prices of new motorcycles in the country when it set up its own 
    plant in Nnewi. The competitive prices of its products (and those 
    of Boulos in Lagos) made tokunbo motorcycles, 
    which were very popular up to the late 90s, very unattractive 
    options.
Innoson is also the only motorcycle marketer that produces crash 
    helmets in Nigeria, using a mix of imported and locally available 
    materials.
