Omatek unveils world’s smallest desktop PC
Indigenous Computer manufacturers, Omatek ventures Plc Monday, 
    unveiled the smallest desktop PC , it tagged the Omatek handtop 
    PC.
The product according to the company is first of its kind to be 
    launched in Africa,. It is a compact 8 inch desktop based on more 
    typical and more powerful notebook components which requires little 
    space on the desk.
According to the Group Managing Director of Omatek, Mrs. 
    Florence Seriki, the Omatek handtop is a great value for anyone 
    looking for a basic PC for managing photos, sending email, surfing 
    the Web, and performing other common tasks. The Omatek handtop PC 
    she added, can equally be described as a 3-in-one system which can 
    be mounted behind the Plasma/LCD to serve as presentation screen 
    and/or TV monitor. It can also afford executives the opportunity to 
    surf the web.
The machine comes equipped with Intel’s new miniature, power 
    efficient 1.6ghz Atom processor 1GB of DDR2 RAM, and a 160GB 
    5400rpm 2.5 inch SATA hard drive. The handtop also has an 
    integrated Intel GMA 950 graphics card with shared video memory.
“The Omatek handtop PC’s gaming performance is very strong using 
    PC World Bench test. It is also low in power consumption as it 
    consumes just 15 to 20 watts of power, which is less than what most 
    notebooks consume’ says Seriki.
It comes with Various platforms like Windows XP Home, XP Pro and 
    Windows vista Basic or Mandriva Linux. It includes a stand, as well 
    as a mount kit and is equipped with a wireless keyboard and mouse 
    with an optional display unit.
“The PC is useful to executives as a mobile desktop, while home 
    and small office users will find it valuable as compact worktool 
    while students will find it handy as rugged but extremely efficient 
    tool for the elearning 
    envinronment, backed by Omatek resource centers being 
    established in most institutions in Nigeria”.
The Omatek boss said her Company’s pioneering efforts in 
    bringing in new technologies in the PC market stemmed from being 
    the first Completely Knocked down factory in Africa, who buys her 
    components from first class factories in Asia.
She added that her company will not rest in its oars in the 
    quest to remain Africa’s foremost solutions provider.
