Where is the world going with BLUETOOTH?
For Nigerian subscribers, perhaps the easiest that come to mind 
    about the bluetooth technology is the wireless headset or handsfree 
    as the case may be. The best outside these could be that of 
    transferring files like pictures, music among others from mobile to 
    mobile or computer to computer.
But the truth is that the world has gone beyond all these. There 
    are bluetooth enabled wrist watches, pens sunglasses among others. 
    Yet mobile technology service providers and inventors are always 
    coming up with some wacky and most unusual uses of this technology, 
    using it to solve problems and most importantly, permeate sectoral 
    barriers.
Just last week, the Bluetooth Special Interest Group, SIG, 
    announced that the industry coalition of leading health care and 
    technology companies charged with establishing a system of 
    interoperable personal telehealth solutions, Continua Health 
    Alliance, has selected Bluetooth wireless technology, to support 
    its telehealth solutions.
SIG announced that once finalised, Continua will include the 
    upcoming Bluetooth low energy wireless technology specification in 
    version two of its Continua Health Alliance Design Guidelines. The 
    selection of Bluetooth low energy technology extends the current 
    Continua standard for the Bluetooth health device profile and is 
    the only wireless technology specification included in Continua’s 
    version one design guidelines.
Bluetooth low energy technology is a power efficient, 
    short-range, wireless technology that offers connectivity between 
    mobile devices and small, battery powered devices such as watches, 
    and health and fitness sensors. Bluetooth low energy technology 
    features low power consumption, small size and low cost, and 
    integration in mobile phones, all providing Continua a reliable 
    solution to enable mobile devices for a wide range of personal 
    telehealth audiencesBut 
    that is not all about Bluetooth technology. More than 12,000 
    companies, along with countless enthusiasts, researchers and 
    inventors, are currently developing innovative solutions with 
    Bluetooth wireless technology.
The technology community is producing some amazing, unusual, and 
    out-of-this world applications that are now making life not just 
    easier, but also more fun. Mobile Week, has decided to present some 
    of the Bluetooth wireless technology enabled products available in 
    the market and even those that are yet to debut.
eSoles
Start-up company, eSoles, unveiled a Bluetooth enabled shoe 
    insert that lets the user keep track of his workout on his mobile 
    phone while running, cycling, walking, skiing, and even jumping 
    rope. The customized insole features 11 pressure sensors and 
    transmits data, including cadence, power output, balance, speed, 
    and distance to user’s mobile phone using Bluetooth wireless 
    technology.
However, available in the market now is a prototype of the shoe 
    insert which is being tested and expected to hit the market in 
    2010.
BlueGuard automatic door opener
This automatic door opener turns a mobile phone into a wireless 
    key. The BlueGuard can detect up to 10 Bluetooth mobile phones, 
    giving access to authorized individuals without the need to swipe a 
    card. It works with gates, overhead doors, and parking barriers for 
    industrial use.
The product is targeted towards the convenience of not having to 
    use keys.
The unit detects up to 10 separate cellphones at up to 33 feet, 
    which is standard low-power Bluetooth range, and hooks up to the 
    door-opening system to enable you to get hands-free entrance.
However, manufacturers of the product says “this is more of an 
    industrial use, and attaches to gates, overhead doors and parking 
    barriers, so it’s less of you getting into your home. Still, it’s 
    quite useful” they added.
Vena bluetooth enabled asthma inhaler
The Vena respirator has added IR and bluetooth connectivity. It 
    marks the first demo unit and will connect via smartphone or 
    computer to help keep track of when it’s being used and can provide 
    reminders for patients who need to scheduled doses. The information 
    can also be sent to relevant doctors and anonymously to health care 
    specialists who like to mine these numbers and find trends 
    
Human Space Invaders
Bluetooth technology features with this device, a re-creation of 
    the video game classic. A player acts as his own game controller, 
    moving left and right while a camera tracks his movements and turns 
    them into game inputs. The game is displayed on a video projector, 
    while a Bluetooth wireless monitor keeps track of the player’s 
    heart rate, which can also be used to vary the difficulty of the 
    game.
Perhaps the Bluetooth Special Interest Group (SIG), came with 
    the vision of what the technology is about to become. The group 
    comprised of leaders in the telecommunications, computing, consumer 
    electronics, automotive and network industries. This group is 
    driving development of Bluetooth wireless technology and bringing 
    it to market. The Bluetooth SIG includes Promoter group companies 
    Ericsson, Intel, Lenovo, Microsoft, Motorola, Nokia and Toshiba, 
    along with over 12,000 Associate and Adopter member companies. The 
    Bluetooth SIG, Inc. headquarters are located in Bellevue, 
    Washington, U.S.A.
