HTC magic, iPhone Killer? Not yet
Ever since Apple Inc. reinvented the smartphone with the 
    release of the iPhone, phone manufacturers have responded with 
    various attempts at matching the functionality, and the hype; 
    Samsung with the Omnia, LG with prada, and even RIM with the 
    Blackberry Storm. And now, from HTC, manufacturers of the “HTC 
    touch HD pro” smart phone comes this beauty in white it calls 
    MAGIC.
The introduction of the HTC Magic is the result of a successful 
    relationship between Vodafone and HTC, and Vodafone’s joining, late 
    last year, of the Open Handset Alliance.
For starters HTC Magic weights a reasonable 118g against the 
    133g of the iPhone. In terms of display the capacitive touch screen 
    16m colours with size 32x480 pixels 3.2 inches, puts it a 
    few steps behind the iPhone.
With memory, the HTC magic possesses the usual unlimited entries 
    in its phone book, a card slot supporting transflash micro SD, 
    which should not be present on a phone like this. You'd wonder 
    what the manufactures were thinking? Okay and here’s what they 
    thought was best, a 192 MB RAM, 512MB ROM (What?!!) and a qualcomm 
    msm 7201A 528 mhz processor running @ 10,236 
    8kb per second.
HTC Magic comes with the standard specs in connectivity, i.e., GSM 850 /900/1800/1900 on a 2G network and HSDPA 
    900/2100 on a 3G network, and of course, WiFi (802.11b/g). 
    Bluetooth on this phone is for headset support only. Na 
    Wa O! GPS is included (like that shouldn't be a 
    standard feature by now).
The operating system makes up for all the short comings the HTC 
    Magic might have; the latest from the stables of Google; the 
    Android, an operating system which is ready to give other mobile 
    phone operating systems such as symbian and even the Mac OSX on the 
    iPhone a good run.
The Iphone came with a 2.0 mega pixel camera with no video or secondary camera 
    capabilines... the HTC Magic pictures comes with a 3.2 mega 
    pixel camera with autofocus, with video recording capabilities and 
    secondary camera. Magic is powered by a battery of talktime 7hours 
    30mins, no where near the 10hrs 
    talk time capacity of the 
    Iphone.
Relatively, the iPhone might not be a better phone than the HTC 
    Magic. They both have their strong points. But what does the HTC 
    Magic need to totally take out the iPhone? How about some 
    Internal memory, minimum 8GB? 
    Add a 3.5 mm headset jack, video player, TV-out, a better 
    battery, some serious hype, and it might just happen.
HTC Magic is definitely a beauty with some impressive features. 
    But it still has a long way to go. For you all who think the HTC 
    Magic is it, you would have to wait a little while to get your 
    hands on it as it will take a while before it to Naija.... but then 
    again, maybe not.
