Revisiting forest of antennas — Nigeria Your Skyline! - 
    Part (11)
“Optic Fiber Vs Wireless” Chris Uwaje _ with contribution from 
    Roland Alden.“ However, in the developing economies where network 
    construction is viewed in context as an investment in the economy 
    and driver of economic growth, this view is 180′ out of synch.
Network construction in these environments should be optimized 
    to enable the maximum amount of opportunity along and adjacent the 
    network route. For example, in the “cost” view model of network 
    construction the need for reliable electricity at a regeneration 
    point is viewed as a negative input that must be compensated for by 
    either 1) costly construction or by 2) fancy electronics that allow 
    the “powerless” region to be traversed without stopping.
In the “development model” the need to provide an oasis of 
    electricity and infrastructure along the network route is also an 
    opportunity to enable an economic environment that will create 
    network customers over the long term. Furthermore, this investment 
    in a “micro economy” lowers the cost of providing service to 
    possibly larger economies elsewhere on the network.
This view of network construction is not common in telecom but 
    is the norm for other networks, such as roads and waterworks.
In many large countries it is not at all uncommon to travel on a 
    long, nearly deserted highway only to find gas stations at 
    amazingly regular intervals which provide the fuel that makes the 
    highway into an economically useful resource. No one builds special 
    purpose vehicles equipped with gigantic fuel tanks that make such 
    gas stations unnecessary.
Typically a small economy may grow up around such a gas station; 
    at a minimum one large enough to sustain the gas station itself but 
    typically one which might further leverage the investment such as 
    mechanized farms, irrigation pumps, a small airport and perhaps a 
    regional healthcare facility. The value of the gas station to the 
    adjacent economies that it nourishes can easily be doubled simply 
    by locating it at the intersection of two highways instead of 
    alongside only one.
Using this example it is easy to see that the “topology” of 
    human trade routes and living patterns guides so much 
    “infrastructure” development. Telecom development follows these 
    patterns to the degree that they must but there are two 
    externalities that have significantly distorted the evolution of 
    telecom. First, there is regulation.
The development of cities, settled areas, roads and trade routes 
    were largely subject to the kind of narrowly focused grants of 
    monopoly seen in telecom. Secondly, the use of technology to 
    attempt to “by pass” small and 
    large blocks of humanity in order to communicate across, over, 
    around and through them is somewhat unique to telecom.
The combination of wireless technology and Africa is often 
    painted as a logically synergistic combination. Large areas that 
    have historically been poorly served by dysfunction monopoly PTTs, 
    poverty that argues for a cheap and “quick fix” solution.
I often hear arguments to the effect that “since Africa is 
    different” …a different approach logically follows. As long as the 
    first postulate goes unchallenged the second assertion gets an 
    intellectual free ride that it does not deserve.
In making the case for fiber in Africa I’d like to argue that 
    Africa is *not* different and that the Africa we see today proves 
    that, if we’d only see it with open eyes.
It would be a tragedy to not apply lessons from other parts of 
    the world which could be used to make Africa 
    telecom_rich simply because 
    of a mistaken notion that somehow Africa is “different” and has to 
    underwrite a costly discovery of its own rules.“
