How functional will the PUMA be?
A quick quiz. Q: What do get when your cross General Motors with 
    Segway? A: The PUMA. (Personal Urban Mobility and 
    Accessiblity). No, not the 
    cat. General Motors and Segway jointly announced project PUMA and 
    released a prototype last week.
Remember the Segway Personal Transporter (PT)? I'm sure you 
    must have seen one on TV. It's that weird looking contraption 
    with two wheels with space for one. Very useful for short 
    distances. It's selling point, 
    as far as I was concerned, was 
    it's 
    maneuverability, even in off-road conditions. By off-road, 
    I mean the kind of road conditions we have on Lagos streets. I 
    don't think one of those ever made 
    it's way to Nigeria, though.
Asked about the off-road readiness of the PUMA, a Segway 
    representative responds, "At this time it is important 
    to remember that this is a prototype, which ultimately is intended 
    to use on the roads of congested urban 
    environments".
Project PUMA has got General Motors and Segway really excited. I 
    kind of share their excitement. The PUMA is actually based on the 
    PT. But it increases capacity to two passengers in a seated 
    position; capable of carrying them up to anywhere between 25 and 35 
    mph (40 - 56 kph) for anywhere between 25 and 35 miles (40 - 56 km) 
    on a single charge, with zero carbon emission. That makes it 
    green.
From what I read on Segway's website and videos I've 
    seen, the PUMA is really something. From zero emission operation, 
    dynamic stability to drive by wire technology. It's a dream 
    gadget. it's really cool. But what if all this really useful 
    technology is incorporated in the design of real cars, or at least 
    something close? Of course, I think I'd prefer four wheels at 
    100Km/hr.
How about a true transport module that has space for a driver 
    and two passengers and is still 'green'. The P.U.M.A. might just remain a rich man's toy. Will the PUMA be 
    affordable enough to actually replace urban preferences for 
    transportation, e.g., 
    motocyles (a.k.a., 
    okada in Nigeria).
Ok.. it's still a 
    prototype. There's still a chance of the current design being 
    discarded for a more functional one. And here's what a friend 
    thinks, "you want green? Get a bicycle!"
