Tackling Unemployment
Every year, young, energetic, and vibrant graduates are being 
    pumped out of NYSC in two batches. Many of them travel here and 
    there in search of greener pasture in several multinational 
    companies, private companies, banks etc. but only a few 
    remain lucky after several attempt. Seriously I have always 
    wondered how unemployment can be high in a country like Nigeria 
    where barriers to business have not yet been set up (the 
    politicians haven't had time). But how long will people fold 
    their arms and remain hungry waiting for government to give them 
    jobs? Do we really think government can provide jobs for all? What 
    then will happen to the unlucky ones that will never get a job? 
    That’s what pumps into my mind, so I made up my mind to write on 
    youth empowerment, atleast for 
    four series, because I believe the youth need to be empowered 
    because they are the future of Nigeria and if they fail, the nation 
    would fail. Seriously every time I look on the streets and see the 
    hopelessness on the faces of highly qualified but jobless people 
    eats at my soul.
The truth is that an average young Nigerian has a mentality to 
    go to school, study well then look for a well paying job. Nobody is 
    thinking of how to create a job and that is why there will always 
    be no job for the job seekers. You know it beats me that here it is 
    becoming the norm to find whole families where virtually every 
    member of that family is unemployed, not because they don’t have 
    qualified people in that family but they just can not get 
    employment. I believe there are so many opportunities in this 
    country, once you get out of the mindset of getting jobs or 
    ‘just opening a shop and selling 
    things'. People need to be innovative; seriously 
    we have a lot of entrepreneurial drive in this country, far more 
    than any other sub-Saharan black nation. Let me give you some 
    wisdom now that there is no job, this is an opportunity for you to 
    make some cash. You can create a career school, were people learn 
    some technical stuff, you just have to find a venue, probably a 
    school which you can use in the evening, and find people with 
    skills to teach, and they should be the best in their given field. 
    About money you can get the LGA to sponsor people, or even 
    politician or companies. You never can tell what you can achieve 
    till you start thinking and start acting. Or 
    As a fresh graduate, you can do some menial jobs to get 
    some money for yourself before your NYSC and start up something. 
    You can even make a lot of sacrifices during your service year to 
    be able to make some savings, and if you have the mindset that this 
    country doesn't have anything to offer you on completion of 
    your service, you can then use the little money you were able to 
    save to start up a small business which you know you are good at 
    and if you are focused, I assure you, the top will be your 
    position. And for young 
    entrepneur, this might be an “Expo” 
    The packaging industry in Nigeria is unexplored. Garri packed the 
    same old way, palm oil- you have to take your own bottle along to 
    buy, do you like plantain chips- how is it packaged. The truth is 
    that people will pay abit more for 
    quality especially Nigerians, you know we like style. Remember ice 
    water, over thrown by pure water. The population of Nigeria is over 
    150 million, if you can satisfy 1% of this population and make =N= 
    1 .00 profit from each customer, in a year your business 
    would have made =N=1,000,000.00 profit 
    But you have to Do your research well and think of the market you 
    want to satisfy. Finally Change your orientation towards creating a 
    job no matter how small you start as long as you are focus, within 
    few years you will see yourself at the top. Bishop David Oyedepo 
    started the winners’ chapel with his family as the only 
    congregation. It is time for the youths of Nigeria to speak out 
    their voice and stair this great 
    nation in the right path to go, the ability lies in our hands to do 
    this, in addition I have a piece of advice for youths, look for a 
    quiet place, sit down and think, about your abilities, there is 
    something God deposited in you to excel, you are unique and there 
    is no two of your kind on earth ,
    its just you with those special abilities, if 
    I may ask , is there anyone who 
    has the same finger print with another 
    ,definitely NO  Same apply to your 
    ability, search Deeply there is something about you. I would 
    continue with the second series next two weeks, if you have any 
    comments or suggestions mail me on 
    wisdomelite@gmail.com...
