Make a rightful 
    chioce
What you are is actually the result of the choices you make. 
    Think about it.
A person chooses the wrong career, that person is done for. 
    Someone gets married to the wrong guy, that is trouble.
Some choose to get educated, and others turn to the wild life 
    and doing drugs.
They don’t have to complain when others are flying and making 
    waves in life and they end up a non-entity in a mental 
    institution.
We can go on and on real life 
    scenerios of what our choices 
    to to us and make of us.
It is important for every woman to realize that you just cannot 
    do things anyhow.
I believe that everyone gets to a place where you know that even 
    if you do succeed in fooling the whole world, you cannot fool or 
    deceive yourself.
If no-one else knows what you want, one person who knows exactly 
    what you want is you. Therefore, it is of utmost importance that 
    you make choices that back up your desires.
You might be telling the whole world one thing, and you know 
    deep down that it is the exact opposite thing that you really 
    want.
Today, I want to encourage every woman to be realistic about 
    what she really wants in life, and go for it.
Most people believe they have forever to do everything and 
    anything they want to do. So deep down their favorite word is 
    “someday” or “when the right time comes” . The right time to start 
    anything is now.
So, you make up your mind if you want to get married or you 
    really want to be single.
Do not carry on like you love your single life when of a truth 
    you know that what you really want is to get married. You know 
    there are some people who have looked into the marriage business, 
    and have decided that marriage is not for them.
If you are one of those, then focus on what you really want 
    instead of fooling around with everyone and wasting everyone’s time 
    giving them the impression that you are ready for marriage, when 
    you really know you are not.
If you know that what you want is prosperity, be focused on it. 
    Work hard and make up your mind to do it right and not settle for 
    mediocrity.
The problem with most people is that they really do not know 
    what they want out of life. They do have an idea, or they have too 
    many options, and they end up being less that what they were 
    destined to be in life.
Do not think that today I am encouraging people to be single, 
    since you know I am a great advocate for marriage. We have already 
    established the fact that no matter how, not every one will end up 
    married.
So does that mean if a person is not married she is useless or 
    that the persons destiny is over? I want to tell you that , you can 
    be single and not lonely.
You can be single and not empty. And if you do want to get 
    married, you can. You don’t have to be embarrassed and feel useless 
    because you are not married. Being single is not a curse.
You can’t be so so hooked up with the fact that you have to get 
    married that you have totally lost life’s worth?
My advice is live one day at a time, giving your best to your 
    life, and maximizing your moments, tomorrow will take care of 
    itself.
Never get to a place where you give up and think you are too 
    old, and nothing good can happen to you. Don’t let the fact that it 
    has not happened make you lose your self esteem.
There is so much more to life. Know that you have been fearfully 
    and wonderfully made.
It is not only t marriage that 
    I am dealing with today. What I am trying to say is, whatever you 
    want to do or be, just go for it. Always go for gold. Never settle 
    for less. If you have not started anything, now is a good time to 
    begin.
It is never too late. That much I can guarantee. I have always 
    told you that no matter how it looks, everyone is already equipped 
    with what it takes to succeed.
The first thing you want to do today, and I think that is a 
    great way to start is to make up your mind that you would maximize 
    and enjoy the totality of your being. 
    .
It is a choice. For anyone to succeed at anything, the attitude 
    must be right. You must be happy the way you are , you must be 
    happy with whatever you are doing, and make up your mind to be the 
    best at it.
Whatever you want to achieve, focus on it and know you will get 
    there.
If you don’t get there fast enough, do not be discouraged or 
    frustrated , you will get there if you are doing it right and if 
    you do not give up.
The right way to start is to make sure that what ever you have 
    chosen to do, or to be is something that makes you happy, and gives 
    you the contentment and peace that makes life worth living. Go for 
    it. Best of luck.
