Your path to success and wealth
By now, I am sure that we are all conscious of our financial 
    health and no longer wrongfully assume that the future will take 
    care of itself (faith without works???)
In the last edition, we focused on two major points:
(a) The need to identify your heart‘s desire, that is knowing 
    exactly what you really want, and;
(b) The need to personalize that desire to suit your 
    circumstance.
Having settled that, the next step will be to determine exactly 
    where you are-Your true financial 
    situation, not what you think you have or what you hope to have. 
    So, I suggest you start by asking yourself the following 
    questions:
-What are your income, lifestyle and equity goals?
-Is there any way you can streamline your spending to fit into 
    your budget?
-Where did your money go, and how can you increase your 
    wealth?
-Are there strategies for generating new sources of wealth?
-How do you quit your unnecessary spending habits that 
    inevitably run you into debts?
-How do you develop the habit of saving in order to achieve 
    financial freedom?
TIME TO TAKE STOCK
Now, write down the following: your present earning, how much 
    money you have in the bank (if any), your debt profile, your net 
    worth and more particularly, your expenses on daily, weekly or 
    monthly basis. If you are not happy with the result of this 
    stock-taking, then, it is time to seriously consider how best to 
    move from your financial struggle to financial freedom.
SO, WHERE WILL THE MONEY COME FROM?
I told you in the previous edition that there are a lot of ways 
    to get rich, which include: chance, speculation, inheritance, 
    theft, extortion, contract scams, counterfeiting, 419, kidnapping, 
    etc.But I also said that 
    MoneySense is only 
    interested in ONE WAY:
The Legitimate Way
Now that you know where you are (your financial situation) and 
    are ready to move forward, it is important that you also understand 
    who you are. By this, I mean your inner self. What is your passion? 
    Follow your passion and start to determine in which direction your 
    energies can be better utilized for effective results.There are 
    generally four categories of people. The category you fall into is 
    usually determined by who you are inside you, your strengths, your 
    fears, your likes and dislikes. This explains why one man‘s meat is 
    another man‘s poison.
For example, are you an employee? This category of people prefer 
    a good steady job where the salaries are guaranteed every month 
    with good benefits to back it up. They are mainly individuals who 
    are security-oriented, and they are happy in employments once there 
    exists binding agreements on their employers. They could be CEOs, 
    Secretaries, or even Security men in any organization, but 
    insecurity and uncertainty are their worst enemies. So, if you are 
    one of those who hate the feeling of fear that comes with economic 
    uncertainty and you are unwilling to take the risk of 
    self-employment, then employment with a secure organization with 
    good benefits will be the best for you.
Others prefer to be Self-employed. These are usually 
    professionals who desire nothing other than to be their own boss. 
    They hate having their income being dictated by others. If they 
    work hard, they expect to be paid well for it and they are not in 
    any way disturbed if they receive nothing for work left undone. The 
    Self-Employed type expects his pay to be commensurate with the 
    quality of his work. They are true artists with their own style of 
    doing things, and usually believe that no one can do a better 
    job.
For this group of people, their independence, freedom and the 
    desire to gain respect as experts in their field is much more 
    important to them. They find it difficult to employ people like 
    themselves because they have the notion that no one can be as good 
    as them. And this means that they have to work much harder because 
    most things are done by them. This group responds to their fears, 
    not by seeking security, but by taking control of their destiny.
Or are you a Business Owner? These are risk bearers, individuals 
    with good leadership qualities and great drive with the ability to 
    set up a good system that works. They may be but not necessarily 
    professionals or graduates but they surround themselves with 
    competent people. The business owner‘s skills are not usually 
    taught in schools and that is why some of the wealthiest people on 
    earth have quit school to become very successful businessmen. They 
    love to delegate duties and are willing to pay for services 
    rendered. The personnel they hire could come from any or all the 
    categories. They are not afraid to bear the risk of investing in 
    their own business.
Then there are The Investors: This is the rich man‘s playground 
    where money works to make money. They are not the typical 9-5 men 
    or the very ‘hard working’ type. They 
    are already done with that. What distinguishes them from the others 
    is their readiness to take investment risks that some others would 
    never contemplate. If you hope to be rich one day, no matter which 
    of the above categories you make your money from, you will 
    ultimately need to get here. This is the place of extreme financial 
    freedom. The place I would love to be!
