Tips and Tricks for Your Personal Style
Your dress sense, whether high street, run-away, hippy and 
    street style, sassy,old 
    school, or african, must suit 
    your looks, personality and lifestyle. Always remember that less is 
    more.
Add your personal touch to the choice of what you are 
    comfortable with. While you would love to wear what you saw Beyonce 
    spotting in her musical video, it may add nothing to your personal 
    style.
Don't spend all your money on designer and expensive stuff. 
    You can mix high street pieces with more expensive stuff. You can 
    actually buy stuff cheap, but it's your style and how you 
    combine what you have that make's it look 
    look like a "million 
    bucks".
Style should out to be centered on creativity and not labels or 
    designs. It should be about what works for you and what suits your 
    body. Details don't cost much but pay dividends when it come 
    to style.
Some quick personal style tips
* Don't discard your out of trend clothes. Save them up for 
    later years, you will still have use for them.
* Combine colours that please you (but avoid color riot, 
    please).
* Handbags, belts and shoes should not necessarily match. Your 
    bag, shoes, and belt should compliment each other but don't 
    have be an exact match. Instead of going all designer brand name, 
    you can have a mixture of it with other unknown apparel.
* You can always make old outfit look new with fashion 
    accessories such as 
    costumes,scarves,belts, shoe and bags.
* Invest in some bold colours 
    clothes,shoes,bags 
    etc which you can mix with what you have already in your 
    wardrobe.
There are lots of things you could wear and combine without 
    breaking style laws. Style shouldn't be about being right. 
    Just learn to be authentic in your personal style. Always remember 
    fashion is dynamic and is ever-changing. What what will never 
    change is how you combine right ensembles with your personality.
