Activities to Round Off the Session
Veteran teachers know well the difficulties of school’s final 
    weeks. Students’ minds are on vacation, grades have been earned and 
    recorded, books must be collected, and resources ordered. Adding to 
    those problems is the fact many schools want you packed and ready 
    to vacate your room for cleaning or moving. Plus, planning 
    graduation events and looking for employment in other schools 
    create a high level of stress for teachers.
Remembering closure is a learning experience, consider having 
    students organize their notes and review what they’ve learned in 
    the form of a play or scrapbook. In addition, have them predict 
    their future and place their prediction in an essay form which they 
    can keep safely and refer to in the future.
Although some of the following ideas may be young for secondary 
    school, they can be modified by adjusting the materials. For 
    example, a secondary school English student could write a poem 
    about their future in the style of an individual studied. Another 
    student could write a fictional account of a future leader based on 
    character traits of those studied. In other words, if students are 
    motivated, the end of the year can be a large, organized and 
    relaxed time.
Other ideas include:
· Create a summer safety poster.
· Make autograph books.
· Write an ode to the classroom.
· Write a letter to next year’s class.
· Make a memory or scrapbook to use next year.
· Create a words-of-wisdom poster for next year’s students.
· Write a letter to next year’s teacher.
· Have students use a large sheet of butcher paper or bulletin 
    board paper to create a timeline listing what they learned this 
    year.
· Create a play that tells the story of the year.
· Finally, make sure you use all that student energy to help you 
    clean and prepare the classroom for next year.
End of Year Teacher Survey
Students are very perceptive. If you walked into any 
    teacher's classroom and asked students for an honest opinion 
    of how fair their teacher is, they would be pretty accurate. You 
    can use this information to your advantage by creating end of the 
    year surveys for your own use. An end of the year survey is one 
    that has all students answer questions you create that are meant to 
    help you become a better teacher for future classes. They can be 
    very informative though you will of course have to remember to take 
    all answers without being too sensitive. Some students will 
    lavishly praise you in the hopes of a better final grade while 
    others might be tough on you - especially if they got in trouble or 
    had poor grades. Nonetheless, you will be able to see an 
    undercurrent of truth if you look at all the answers together. They 
    can also provide insight into improving lessons for the next 
    year.
Following are some possible questions you might use in your 
    survey:
• What was your favorite topic covered this year?
• What was your favorite lesson overall?
• What was your least favorite topic covered this year?
• What was your least favorite lesson overall?
• What suggestions do you have for your teacher to help increase 
    communication with students?
• What suggestions do you have for your teacher to make the 
    class more effective next year?
• Name 3 positive aspects of your class.
• Name 3 negative aspects of your class.
• Any further suggestion?
By giving students the ability to provide you with feedback, you 
    will have information that if used wisely can help you to become a 
    better, more effective teacher in the future.
TEACHER :Give me three reasons why the world is round 
    
PUPIL : Well my dad says so, my mum says so and you say so!
