CHEMICAL APPLICATIONS : Avoiding Scalp Burns
Yes, it is possible to apply relaxing creams without burning the 
    scalp, and I can tell you why: because these products are so 
    readily available, we tend to forget that these straightening 
    agents are SERIOUS chemicals that should not be taken for 
    granted!
So firstly, I would watch the stylist’s attitude to the process 
    she is about to undertake. This is because apart from speed being 
    of the essence, stylist needs to concentrate to make sure the cream 
    does not touch the scalp until the process is almost complete 
    ; No room for nonchalance here! As you 
    know, once cream comes in contact with the scalp, you can not avoid 
    burns.
The Angel’s studio HAIR CLINIC guide to a ‘burn-free-perm’:
Do know your hair and scalp characteristics 
Do not shampoo hair for about 7 to 14 days before touch-up 
    
Do not take out braids or weave at least 7 days before touch-up 
    
Do not swim for at least 7 days before touch-up if you don’t 
    want hairline to burn
Do not massage, scratch or stimulate scalp in any way for up to 
    7 days before touch-up
Do check scalp for bruises and abrasions that will hurt if 
    chemical is applied
Do apply petroleum jelly to every inch of scalp about 24 hours 
    before application
Do not wear any head-gear for at least 3 days before so edges 
    won’t burn
Do have your application done in the morning to avoid 
    perspiration on scalp
Do avoid using gels, spritz and sprays on hair the week of your 
    touch-up
Do consult a professional to tell you the ideal product for your 
    hair
Do use the right strength of product for your hair type 
    
Do not massage hair while the chemical is on it, rely on cream 
    to straighten
Do not comb hair while applying cream so comb-teeth will not 
    touch scalp
The best advice though, is for you to ALWAYS utilize the 
    services of a professional every time you want a touch-up; scalp 
    burns MAY lead to bald patches if the follicle is damaged [hair 
    will never grow on that spot again]. Do not ignore the burns when 
    they happen; you MAY need to see a Doctor so that the wounds do not 
    get infected as well.
War against dandruff
My Anti-Dandruff treatment starts with a dry scalp; contrary [I 
    know!] to what many are used to. FLAKE KONTROL shampoo must be 
    applied to a dry scalp. As a Trichologist, my mission is to solve 
    your hair and scalp problems using techniques and a combination of 
    products that should deliver on the promise of healthy hair. Now, 
    Patricia wanted to know [by text] why I insist that FLAKE KONTROL 
    shampoo should be applied on to the dry scalp. She got the 
    Anti-Dandruff treatment kit and has noticed a difference after ONLY 
    the 2nd application.
It is natural: Patricia is curious about why the scalp is 
    clearing up after suffering dandruff for all her adult life without 
    any reprieve, and then getting this result.
One of the challenges I have faced as a hair consultant is how 
    to give clients suffering from perennial dandruff, a minimum [at 
    least] of 3 weeks free-of-flakes. I have tried many products, 
    preparations and mixtures; I have tried many methods and 
    techniques. Now, I can say for sure that the shampoo I have TRULY 
    works, but, it must be used the way I have described. I can tell 
    you however, that I do not use any other shampoo this way; shampoos 
    are ordinarily poured on to the palms and applied to wet or damp 
    hair. Flakes will never be completely cleared from the scalp 
    surface after the shampooing if hair was wet before application.
However, the FLAKE KONTROL scalp crème can be used by anyone 
    [male or female] who wants a clean, clear healthy scalp. It is not 
    restricted to only those who suffer from dandruff. At Angel’s 
    studio HAIR CLINIC, we use the scalp cream for every head that we 
    handle. It promotes a healthy scalp because it contains only the 
    purest Natural ingredients [coconut oil, Shea butter, hemp oil, 
    jojoba oil etc] with a generous serving of peppermint oil to 
    counter any itching one may experience from time to time. It is an 
    excellent growing aid, guaranteed to soothe scalp and keep hair 
    moisturized for up to a week without needing to oil the scalp. The 
    scalp cream works best when combined with massage, concentrating on 
    those areas that need ‘help’
UNDERSTANDING MAKE-UP
Organic Or Inorganic
Make-up is a wonderful and exciting way of enhancing one’s 
    features to achieve a natural look, a high fashion look or even a 
    combination of the two. The natural look is NOT a face devoid of 
    make-up but one that simply does not look made-up. So you can be 
    wearing foundation, eye shadows, blushers, lipstick and mascara, 
    and still look natural. That is why it can be amusing when you meet 
    women who say they never wear make-up, as if it is a badge of 
    honor; every woman needs to wear make-up. It is the way in which we 
    apply it, how subtle the tones used are or will be, and how it is 
    all harmonized, that determines the natural results we get. 
    Remember that the rule of thumb is this: make-up should not make 
    you look different; you should still look yourself, albeit a more 
    attractive you. The compliment you should be getting is “you look 
    good today” and not “your make-up looks good today”.
The term ‘natural’ cosmetics are often used 
    as a marketing strategy to create an image of wholesome products. 
    Completely natural products do NOT exist, at least in make-up that 
    we wear. They are not only aesthetically unpleasant but they can 
    and do not survive idly on the shelf. Where water is present, 
    preservatives MUST be included as they are essential if one seeks 
    to prevent deterioration. No doubt, many plant oils have beneficial 
    properties, but generally, they can not be used in isolation. They 
    are normally greasy and can cause irritation if used un-diluted. As 
    far as colors are concerned, natural ones are sometimes used by the 
    cosmetic industry, but they will fade in sunlight if inorganic 
    pigments are absent.
Unfortunately, we all are wary of using chemicals because the 
    chemical industry has a bad reputation. Science has a great deal to 
    offer; for instance, skin care has benefited immensely from 
    advances made in research. But plants on the other hand, have been 
    used effectively also for centuries. We should not disregard our 
    past and present; ideally, we must try to achieve a balance by 
    combining the two and extracting the best from both fields.
