Discover what works for you
I have told you before that no woman came out of her 
    mothers womb looking like 
    miss universe. Everyone does something. Well I must say there must 
    be a few naturals, but of a truth everyone enhances what they 
    have.
You must just try to discover what works for you. Our mothers, 
    grandmothers and great grandmothers all had their beauty secrets, 
    and you saw that they mostly had beautiful skin and lovely hair.
Today, I will be sharing a few beauty secrets with you and most 
    of them won’t cost you anything.
Before anything can work, you must as a woman learn always to be 
    well postured. \i mean you do not have 
    to slouch. You must always carry yourself well. 
    –whether you are walking or 
    sitting down, your back must be straight, shoulders straight and 
    stomach always tucked in. Every woman must always be posture 
    conscious.
So once that is in place, you must work on all you have. Your 
    hair must never be tacky or dirty. Make sure that your hair is 
    clean and you always have a style that suits your face.
Now , every woman must learn to 
    take care of her body first of all we all know that the body must 
    be clean at all times, and that everyone must indulge in the use of 
    a deodorant.
The real care your body needs is exercise. I do not think that 
    there is anyone who really genuinely loves to exercise but 
    everybody needs exercise to keep fit. Many women confuse work and 
    exercise.
Most of the time, work is stress, but exercise is consistent and 
    continuous activity or movement that increases the rates of ones 
    heart beat and the flow of blood to the heart. You can burn your 
    calories through exercise.
Now when it comes to the skin, I believe no woman should 
    compromise. You must know what works for the skin. I hear that 
    generally, and fruit that is good for eating is good for feeding 
    the skin.
So just like you feed the stomach, you must feed the skin. 
    Paw-paw, avocado pear, honey, oatmeal 
    , Milk, 
    Palmoil, Shea butter, 
    Pure Coconut oil, Aloe 
    Vera, etc are very good for the skin. You can just smooth over the 
    skin, and leave it for a while and wash off.
Every woman must know that steam is very good for the skin. It 
    moisturizes the skin, and opens up the skin pores so that the skin 
    can glow. A steam bath is a major part of the beauty therapy in 
    most spas, and beauty clinics. It soften the skin, so that whatever 
    you use on the skin after the steam therapy works well.
For those who do not go to the spa or a beauty clinic, you can 
    have the table top facial sauna at home, or you can boil water in a 
    bowl, and cover your head over it with a towel 
    ( you know the old fashioned remedy 
    our mothers has for a cold). No matter how you do it, getting the 
    steam on the skin is what matter. You should learn to steam, 
    exfoliate and massage your skin. The truth? You really do not need 
    me to be telling you this. All the information you need on how to 
    treat your skin is available on the internet.
Every woman must cultivate the habit of reading and browsing. We 
    are living at the greatest time in all history. A time where all 
    information is readily available. All you have to do is get on the 
    internet. So many experienced cosmetic surgeons and beauticians 
    volunteer all these information on the internet.
You must just search for the information and discover what works 
    for you. My advise though is that 
    natural nourishment is the best for the skin.
When you have taken care of your posture, your hair and your 
    skin, the next thing you must pay attention to is your dress sense. 
    Do you know that these days, dressing up beautifully does not have 
    to be expensive.
You must know how to shop right. If you are making your clothes, 
    with trial and error or through what others say, you will discover 
    a good tailor or dressmaker, and if you must buy ready made, if you 
    shop round, you can get good bargains.
The most important thing is that you understand you figure and 
    your complexion.
That way, you know what colours and what styles suit your 
    person. Anything you do or wear must enhance what you have, and it 
    must spell and smell class.
Finally, no matter what you do, drink plenty of water and eat 
    right. Water is very good for your system and for your skin. Make 
    sure that your food is giving you the nutrients that you need. If 
    you have access to goat milk and soya milk, I am told they are 
    better than cow milk . Best of luck.
