Don’t borrow money to look flashy
We Nigerians are a different set of people. We just love 
    flamboyance. It is amazing. Every one wants to look good. We all 
    know it is alright to look good. Everyone wants to live and look 
    like a Hollywood star.
There is no problem with that. But the question is, does 
    everyone earn what a Hollywood star earns? Really when a person has 
    to borrow money to look good, it becomes a problem. For us, looking 
    good starts with the house we live in, the car we drive, the clubs 
    we go to, the people we hang out with, the shoes we wear and the 
    whole works. Think about it.
If a person has to borrow to fulfill those obligations as the 
    case may be, then there is a problem. We are not talking about food 
    or clothing to cover ones body here. We are talking of extreme 
    vanity. Too many people are in debt and problems unnecessarily. We 
    really all have to sit back. Reflect and change our mind set.
Listen to me!!! You are here to fulfill your destiny. It is not 
    tied to any other persons destiny. You are not in competition with 
    any one. Your focus must be on living well. Believe me, living well 
    is possible. Living well is not supposed to be stressful if we all 
    learn to “cut our coat according to the cloth we have" 
     What I am saying essentially is that you 
    live within your means.
We are all agreed that everyone can make a living. Come on now, 
    even an artisan in Nigeria earns at east two thousand naira 
    everyday , and labor is at least one thousand naira everyday. We 
    have already established the fact that every one can work. There is 
    something everyone can do to make money if you are not 
    condescending. The problem we have is that everyone wants to start 
    of big.
Your neighbor or friend is a ‘big boy’ or ‘big girl’ as the case may be, 
    and you want to kill yourself. You do not even know the price 
    he/she had to pay to get to where they are.
Many people really have enough to do what they need to do, but 
    they think they must do it bigger so they can show off for all to 
    see. Really!!! Who cares !
We all need to change our mindset. We all must realize that in 
    this world, you are not in competition with anyone. It is so sad. 
    Many people want to wear Ferragamo shoes, Rolex or Cartier watches, 
    drive the latest BMW, live in Park view estate and Ikoyi. There is 
    nothing wrong with all these things if you can really afford 
    them.
You must use what you have to get what you really need. You need 
    shoes, buy shoes. You need a wrist watch, there are so many 
    functional wristwatches. If you can afford to pay your rent 
    anywhere every month for the rest of your life without having to 
    borrow any money from anyone, you are living good. You are on 
    top.
Too many people need to buy a car. They know they have enough 
    for a Pinto, but they must buy a Passat. What is wrong with us. 
    That you can buy a Pinto and maintain it, is a lot of Grace. There 
    is a way you step into a Pinto, that would even make the owner of a 
    ferreri envious.
Be happy. It is all about contentment. This woman bought a 
    beetle in those days, and when she was telling her mum, she said”I 
    just bought a car, but its only a beetle 
    o” Or this couple who just moved into their apartment, and 
    the wife was telling her friend. “Finally, we found a place. But 
    it’s just a one bedroom apartment” Who 
    cares!!! The stress is all yours.
Everyone has their life to live. Live yours. With what you have, 
    you can live well. It is a mindset. It is all about contentment.
What I am saying is not that you should be complacent. There is 
    always a place for growth. You can only be where you are at any 
    point in time. If point A is where you are now, be realistic. Yes, 
    you are aspiring to get to point B, but what point A has to offer, 
    receive it and enjoy it with thanksgiving. When you do get to point 
    B, you can step up into what point B has it offer.
That point A that you are at now, and you do not appreciate is 
    someone else’s aspiration. Be happy. Be content.
I visited this African country last weekend, and I think they 
    are worth learning from. When things were bad for them, they left 
    their country, and came over to Nigeria, and did every available 
    odd job that was available at the time, and when things took a 
    better turn for their country, they went back and they are enjoying 
    it.
Now you see most of them with small functional cars that can 
    take them from point A to B. Many live in small houses. I am not 
    saying that they don’t have their own minuses, but they are happy 
    people. I see them as people making the best of what they have.
They have discovered oil now, I know when oil money comes, they 
    would adapt to the good life and start spending oil money. 
    Contentment is key. Don’t kill yourself. It is your life. Live for 
    yourself.
