If you are exhausted from continually competing to be as 
    “successful” as others, then here are a few suggestions to help you 
    look at yourself and your life with fresh eyes.
1. Observe how often you compare yourself with others. Change 
    starts with awareness. When we watch our thoughts closely, we begin 
    to see the mindsets we’ve adopted. Each belief has a corresponding 
    emotional reaction. What beliefs about yourself are causing you 
    distress, dissatisfaction, frustration, sadness or depression? For 
    at least one day notice how often you look at someone and then 
    criticize yourself based on the way they look or what they have. 
    What do you think of yourself? How do these thoughts make you feel? 
    Notice how often you measure your worth by what you don’t have or 
    what you haven’t done.
2. Release the inner pressure. Stop judging yourself. Ask your 
    Source to help you see yourself in a positive way. You are an 
    exquisite expression of Life, valuable by virtue of your creation 
    apart from any external having or doing. Life is not a race it’s an 
    adventure. Allow yourself to be who you are and where you are. Why 
    not accept yourself? Each moment is meant to be enjoyed not judged, 
    grieved, avoided, endured or rushed through. Don’t try to be a palm 
    tree if you are a bird of paradise. Don’t down yourself if you 
    enjoy the marketplace rather than an office or if you desire to 
    create with your hands rather than on a computer. The only way to 
    happiness is to be yourself and do what you love. Get to know 
    yourself and set your intention to grow into what feels right for 
    you.
3. Celebrate your uniqueness. Regain your energy by dancing to 
    your own beat. Take time to explore the REAL you, the one who longs 
    to express yourself to the world. It may feel strange at first. You 
    might not even remember who you are…but that’s all right. Now is 
    your chance to declare yourself free. When you let go of society’s 
    rigid guidelines and allow yourself to follow your passions, moving 
    toward what brings you joy, you will be amazed at the relief, 
    enthusiasm and serendipities that begin to flow into your life.
4. Realize there will be naysayers. In general people want us to 
    remain with them—trapped in the comparison cycle. After all, those 
    who stop playing the game become unpredictable. They think 
    independently.
