Cracked wide open (3)
THE road to spiritual growth and an “Awakening of my 
    life’s purpose” (a great book by Eckhart Tolle) is not one 
    that is a quick fix but I am thankful that the seed has been 
    planted.
I am finding out that being cracked open is the only way we will 
    ever really wake up. That we are more than our physicality, 
    perceptions and positions.
We are looking for fulfilment in the wrong things, and that much 
    is obvious as the rich cry as much as the poor.
One of the most charismatic men I ever had the pleasure of 
    knowing was a messenger at the Nigerian Stock Exchange. I worked 
    there for a year during my youth service and he was fondly called 
    Oga Bonny.
He was not a young man and while his job was as lowly as they 
    came, he carried himself with such grace and dignity that he 
    automatically just commanded respect from everyone.
Oga is a title that means master in Nigerian Pidgin English and 
    he was called that even by the head honcho of the exchange. 
    Everyone liked him and I always wondered why he seemed so content, 
    he didn’t earn that much, surely he wanted more than being a 
    messenger!
Quiet dignity
I remember telling one of my colleagues that I was at times 
    jealous of Oga Bonny as he always seemed content, while I, the 
    twenty one year old who drove the BMW (I inherited my brother’s old 
    jalopy) was quite frankly miserable 80 per cent of the time.
I was spending time meditating this week when I remembered him 
    and it was because he reminded me of the general overseer of the 
    Redeemed Christian Church of God, Pastor Enoch Adeboye.
Both men carry something that is very attractive, a quiet 
    dignity that I now recognise to be stillness, they are rooted in 
    the present so you find people gravitating towards them, wanting a 
    bit of what they have.
They know what the rest of us should, that God is in the 
    present, in the now, not in the future or the past!
That’s why when Moses asked God who he should say sent him on 
    Mount Sinai. He said! I am who I am!! Our God, a very present help 
    in times of need!
I really do enjoy all the texts I receive and while I am often 
    exasperated by people whose main goal is to dissect an 
    insignificant word or syntax, I am moved to want to help those who 
    like me crave more meaning and know they deserve more than running 
    an unnecessary rat race.
A text or 10 can’t answer most of the requests and questions 
    that people raise but I thought it might help if we all can work 
    together at holding on to the stillness within, irrespective of 
    race or creed. If you are able to find peace within, you will be 
    able to let go of the ego, the seat of all 
    grievances’ and offences.
It won’t matter that other people’s 
    perceptions’ are different 
    from yours, insults or 
    criticisms’ unfair or otherwise will be like water off a 
    duck’s back. I can’t teach anyone anything; the answers are all 
    within them.
The Native Americans say that for every sickness, or poisonous 
    bite or attack, the antidote or cure is always within a few meters 
    radius of incident.
I am not proposing a new radical change all I am asking is that 
    we become masters of our minds, that we slow down the frenzied pace 
    of thought so we can let the spirit within us bring peace.
We are going to learn to embrace stillness whether we like it or 
    not, the question is are we going to do it peacefully or be cracked 
    open with some painful experiences?
Those who have near death experiences normally evolve as changed 
    persons and they surrender to the peace but must we wait to get a 
    debilitating disease or almost die before we embrace the 
    stillness?
There is a choice to be made, you can hold on to your frantic 
    ambition and run yourself ragged, absent from your own life or 
    surrender to a power that is all knowing, all seeing and all 
    present and still achieve all you ever thought or 
    more !
If your life is perfect and sublime, you wouldn’t be reading me 
    but if you like me want more meaning, more joy and more peace, then 
    its time to surrender to all that is.
To become one with the I Am, to forgive those who hurt us so we 
    can be healed, to rely on a power that is within us and not of us, 
    to live joyfully in the now!! Bitterness is not only destructive it 
    is contagious; hate is counter productive and serves no useful 
    process.
Its time to take a break and pause a while, you are not lonely 
    because you don’t have more friends, you are lonely because you are 
    disconnected from your source; the source that is right within 
    you!!
Don’t wait for life to crack you open, do it voluntarily, be 
    open, start living in the now because just like God is the now, you 
    are the now.
