Renewing the Mind for Successful Living
Today I’m starting a series on the Mind and how you can achieve 
    whatever you desire, be it weight loss, healthy living, a fulfilled 
    life with the power of a motivated mind. I welcome you to an 
    excursion into the most powerful part of our being, the mind. You 
    can transform your life and your world if you act on what you will 
    learn from this series.
Over the years, man has accepted to understand the functioning 
    of the human mind and its faculties of thinking, remembering, 
    perception, imagination, etc; and how these activities interact 
    with the emotions, motivation and human behaviour. This area of 
    study has been of major interest to the psychologists. In fact, 
    psychology as a field of human study has at various times been 
    described as the study of the mind.
The understanding of the functioning of the mind is pivotal to 
    the understanding of human nature and behaviour. The mind controls 
    cognition, that is, thinking, intelligence, reasoning, memory, 
    perception, etc, It also controls 
    man’s feelings and ability to make decisions. The ‘Emotion’ is the feeling aspect of the mind, while 
    the ‘Will’ is the decision-making 
    aspect of the mind.
Thinking essentially involves the generation of ideas for the 
    purpose of understanding, explaining and interpreting different 
    phenomena. The mind does this by processing and evaluating all 
    kinds of information it perceives from the environment. That 
    information it perceives as valuable knowledge are stored in the 
    mind’s memory bank where it can be retrieved for immediate or 
    future use. But where information is perceived as junk, it is 
    rejected and no space is provided for it in the mind’s memory 
    bank.
Such information is immediately expunged and erased from the 
    mind. As an information-processing plant, the mind has the capacity 
    to process and sift information. God created man with a sound mind 
    that must be actively engaged in generating positive ideas. In 
    fact, within the mind exists the ability and potential for 
    creativity and innovation.
The mind possesses the power to produce wealth and material 
    resources even out of nothing. With the mind, man can tap into the 
    invisible, spiritual realm and draw higher knowledge for the 
    production of goods and services for the good of humanity. As the 
    seat of human knowledge and personality, the mind is therefore 
    man’s faculty for productivity, greatness and successful living: 
    “For as he thinketh in his heart, so is he……..” 
    (Proverbs 23:7).
But the minds of many people are not 
    productive ! Many people 
    have idle minds that have remained passive, and incapable of 
    generating any positive ideas. Many people have failed in life, not 
    because God created to be failures, but because they have over the 
    years conditioned their minds to think thoughts of failures and 
    impossibilities ! They 
    have developed a ‘negative mindset’.
The mindset is how the mind has been programmed or conditioned 
    to think. In fact, what a man is today is the product of his 
    mindset in the past, and what he will become tomorrow will depend 
    on how his mind is programmed in its thinking today!
But one beautiful thing about the mindset is that it can always 
    be changed. And the power to make that change from a negative 
    mindset to a positive possibility thinker is within the 
    individual.
This title has been written as an aid to inspire, instruct and 
    motivate you to take your destiny in your own hands by changing 
    your mindset. A transformed will produced changed attitudes, which 
    will ultimately produce changed behaviours and changed lives.
No body was born to fail in life. You are born to be successful. 
    God created you a success. Creation is eagerly waiting for you to 
    arise and take your place of greatness. But before greatness can 
    come your way, you must have to deal with the stumbling block of a 
    negative mindset ! 
    and you can do something about it 
    today ! 
    arise now and become that successful person you have always 
    wanted to be. Arise and dethrone those negative thoughts and 
    immigrations that have held you captive and down over the years. 
    You can uproot those self-depreciating thoughts which have 
    de-motivated and incapacitated your drive for success and 
    excellence. You can deal with that doubt which has paralysed you 
    with the fear of failure.
If only you can believe – you will soon find out that nothing 
    shall be impossible to you.
NB: Every one that has sent in a text message or email to 
    express interest in the pre-launch copy of my forthcoming book The 
    Fastest Way to Lose Weight will be contacted as soon as the book is 
    released. You can still text in to express your interest. The 
    Edmark Power of 4 Slimming Supplements are also available on 
    demand. I am also happy to announce that the 
    EDMark Company has now opened an 
    office in Lagos. The products are now cheaper and more readily 
    available!
