It has been mentioned earlier that Hausa serves as a lingua franca in all the states in Northern Nigeria. Furthermore, Hausa is taught as a school subject at every level from primary school to university. The overall status of Hausa in Nigeria is that it is a very influential regional language with the potential to become a national language.

Nigeria, as a sovereign nation today, has passed through two important stages of political development. First, as a nation under colonial rule and second as an independent nation with full self-rule. Independent Nigeria was first fragmented into regions and later into states. We may wish to ask how Nigerian languages fared during the two opposing administrative periods. In particular, this paper discusses the position of Hausa in colonial and post-colonial Nigeria. It is important to note the overlap between the period of colonial administration proper and the transitional period of self-government before independence. Thus, in this paper, we intend to capture this administrative overlap by referring to the period as that of colonial-cum-northern regional government. The period of proper independent rule will also be considered as the period when states were first created up to the present day.

The paper is divided into five sections. Section one is the general introduction. Section two discusses the early European interest in Hausa. Section three traces the development of Hausa studies under the colonial-cum-northern regional government. Section four deals with the fragmentation of Hausa under the state governments. The last section provides recommendations for the uplift of Hausa as a language and as a field of study.

Early European Interest in Hausa
The study of Hausa by the Europeans started in the 1840s. Hausa was first reduced to writing using the Roman script in 1843 by a German missionary called James Frederick Schon. J.F. Schon wrote several books on Hausa, and two of them deserve special mention. In 1885, Schon wrote his "Magana Hausa," a book containing Hausa stories and believed to be the first full-fledged book written in Hausa using the Roman script. Schon also wrote a dictionary in 1876 entitled "Dictionary of the Hausa Language." It is worth noting that the orthography developed for Hausa by J.F. Schon in his works closely resembles the present-day Standard Hausa Orthography.

In 1890, a London-based society called 'The Hausa Society' sponsored Charles H. Robins to conduct research on the Hausa language. Robins was the first researcher to introduce the use of dots beneath the Hausa sounds b, d, and k to represent the present hooked letters b, d, k. He also introduced the marking of tone to distinguish words in Hausa.

The period from 1840 to 1899 is considered the period of early European interest in Hausa studies. During this period, a considerable amount of work was done on all aspects of Hausa (i.e., language, literature, and culture). In 1911, B. Stuck attempted a bibliography in the Journal of the African Society containing about 237 works on all aspects of Hausa.

Hausa under the Colonial-cum-Northern Regional Government
British colonial rule in Northern Nigeria dates back to 1900, and the year 1914 witnessed the amalgamation of Northern and Southern Nigeria. Thus, in 1914, the Nigerian nation came under single and unified British colonial rule.

It is important to note that all works done on Hausa by the Europeans before 1900 were essentially sponsored by either missionaries or some independent societies in Europe. But from 1900 onward, the colonial administration was equally involved in the promotion of Hausa studies. In the first half of the 20th century (1900-1950), there was an influx of works on various aspects of Hausa studies. Some of the important works include dictionaries, grammar books, and rules of orthography. Roxana Ma Newman (1974) reported that Reverend George Percy Bargery's dictionary, the "Hausa-English Dictionary and English-Hausa Vocabulary," was ranked amongst the most important linguistic works done in the first half of the 20th century.