Grammatical Tones
Grammatical tones are tones that are grammatically significant and, within the autosegmental framework of generative phonology, exist independently of 'segmental' phonological strings. They are mapped onto specific positions in the grammatical constructions in which they occur and affect the tonal output of the strings in the surface form. Tone exerts a great deal of influence on the grammar of Urhobo, as most of the grammatical information available is conveyed through the manipulation of tones. For instance, most tense and aspectual information is indicated by tones. The segmentalization of these grammatical tones usually results in the modification of lexical tones borne by adjacent segments. We will consider a few of these.

Tone in the Associative Noun Phrase
The associative construction is also called the Noun + Noun phrase. This construction is marked by the morpheme /re/, which bears a high tone and occurs between the two nouns. In normal conversational speech, the vowel of this associative marker (AM) is always elided, but its high tone remains and gets relinked onto the prefix vowel of the following noun, resulting in tonal modifications on the second noun. Let us consider a few examples:

From the examples above, we notice that while the first nouns in each phrase retain their lexical tones, the prefix vowels of the second nouns are all realized with the high tone given to them by the associative marker. Consequently, examples 6(a), (b), and (d), whose second nouns in their citation form begin with a low tone, become high because the high tone of the associative marker relinks to their prefix vowel. Thus, we have a tonal modification from low to high. In 6(c), because the second noun already bears a high tone, no tonal modification occurs as the two high tones merely contract into one high tone.

Tone in the Verb Phrase
Most simple verbs in Urhobo are either monosyllabic or disyllabic and begin with a consonant segment. There are no minimal pairs in the verb class that differ in meaning only as a result of a difference in tone patterning. While nouns can be classified according to their tone patterns, verbs cannot. In citation form, all verbs and all monosyllabic subject and object pronouns are realized on the low tone. Although a number of tonal alternations are attested in the verb, these are usually motivated by the different grammatical configurations in which they function. Consequently, all verbs with the same syllable structure behave alike in the same grammatical configuration. For example, all monosyllabic verbs behave alike in terms of tone in a past tense construction, and all disyllabic verbs behave similarly.

For reasons such as these, Urhobo verbs and monosyllabic subject and object pronouns are assumed to be toneless in the underlying form and receive tone depending on the grammatical configuration in which they function. As a result, tone carries a great syntactic functional load, particularly in the verb phrase. In order to analyze tonal alternations in the Urhobo verb phrase, it is necessary to recognize the existence of tonal morphemes (tomorphs) or grammatical tones as an essential part of the grammar. These tomorphs may be single tone units or tonal melodies, that is, fixed tonal patterns, which are grammatically significant and exist independently of segmental strings. They are quite distinct from lexical tones. They are obligatorily segmentalized in appropriate positions within the grammatical configuration, and their segmentalization often causes lexical tones to delink or, at best, form a glide.

In this section, we will consider grammatical constructions in the three basic tenses: the present, the past, and the future tenses.

The Present Tense
The present tense construction in Urhobo is used to convey habitual as well as present or continuous actions. The morpheme marking the tense is a floating high tone, which occurs at the end of the subject noun phrase. In order for this tomorph to be realized, the final vowel of the subject noun phrase is lengthened slightly to accommodate it. If the subject NP already ends on a high tone, the lengthening of both the high tone and the final vowel is easy to perceive. However, if the subject NP ends on a low tone, the present tense tomorph is segmentalized onto the lengthened portion of the final vowel. We previously mentioned that when the subject pronoun or verb is not bearing a tomorph, it is realized on a low tone. Consequently, if the subject NP is a pronoun, the first part of the vowel bears a low tone while the lengthened portion bears the high tone. Let us examine some examples. (Note: pr.t = present tomorph.)

The Past Tense
In its full form, the past tense verb appears with a suffix, which is realized in two phonological shapes depending on the vowel harmony requirements of the verb stem vowel. (Vowels in this language fall into two groups with regard to vowel harmony, marked by the Advanced Tongue Root [ATR]). Vowels /i, e, o, u/ are [+ATR], while /แบน, a, o/ are [-ATR]. For a detailed discussion of vowel harmony in Urhobo, see Aziza (1994, 1997). The alternating forms of the verb suffix are -ri and -re. If the verb stem vowel is [+ATR], it takes the suffix -ri; if the verb stem is [-ATR], it takes -re. This suffix occurs only when the verb is not followed by an object; if it is, the suffix is deleted.

In terms of tonal alternation, the past tense construction assigns a high tomorph, which is segmentalized onto the only vowel segment of a monosyllabic verb stem or onto the final vowel of a disyllabic verb stem. When the verb stem is followed by a noun object, the final vowel of the verb stem is either elided or undergoes glide formation, resulting in the past tense tomorph being set afloat. Since it is a grammatical tone, it obligatorily relinks onto the prefix vowel of the following noun object, resulting in the delinking of the lexical tone in that position if it is low. However, if the lexical tone is high, it contracts with the high tomorph, making the effect of the relinking vacuous. Let us consider some examples:

The Future Tense
In its full form, the future tense is marked segmentally by a particle, which occurs between the subject noun phrase and the verb stem of the clause. This particle is realized in two phonological shapes: /che/ and /cha/, depending on the vowel harmony requirement of the verb stem vowel. If the verb stem vowel is [-(-ART], it selects /che/, and if it is [-ART], it selects /cha/. The future tense is used to indicate an action that is yet to commence or one that is being contemplated.

Tonally, the future tense construction is marked by an H - L - H tone sequence, distributed as follows: a) The first high tone is segmentalized onto the final vowel of the subject noun phrase (or the only vowel segment of a monosyllabic subject pronoun). b) The low tone is mapped onto the future tense particle, and c) The second high tone is mapped onto the only or first vowel of the verb stem, spreading onto any following vowel segment within the verb stem. Thus, all verb stem vowels are realized as high. We will consider some examples:

The examples above show that tonal alternations in this construction result from the segmentalization of the two high tones marking the future tense. The segmentalization of the first high tone onto the subject NP results in the automatic delinking of the inherent or lexical tone in that position if it is low. This is unlike what happens with the present tomorph, whose segmentalization results in the lengthening of the final vowel of the subject NP to accommodate the tomorph. The second high tone of the future tense spreads onto other vowel segments within the verb stem if the verb stem is other than monosyllabic. It is unlike the past tense tomorph, which does not spread. However, like the past tense tomorph, if the final vowel of the verb stem is elided or becomes a glide, this tomorph obligatorily relinks, and the result is the automatic delinking of a following inherent tone. In each case, the effect of segmentalization is vacuous if the inherent tone is also high.

Negation and Interrogation
Negation in Urhobo is marked by a floating L-H tone sequence, which is mapped onto the final vowel in the phonetic realization. To accommodate the tone sequence, the final vowel is lengthened. In orthography, this is represented by doubling the final vowel. Thus, we have the following:

On the other hand, interrogation is marked by a floating low tone, which is realized on the final vowel of the utterance. If the statement already ends on a low tone, the addition of this question morpheme results in perceiving the utterance on an extra low level. However, if the statement ends on a high tone, the addition of the question morpheme results in the creation of a HL contour, but there is no lengthening of the final vowel. The following are some examples:

From the foregoing, it is clear that tone has both lexical and grammatical functions in Urhobo and that it is as important, if not more important, than the consonant and vowel segments used in utterances.

The Need for Tone-Marking in the Writing System
We decided to provide a technical treatment of section 3 to show that tone in Urhobo is not just a matter of choice or something that is haphazardly done, but that it is a systematic phenomenon well-entrenched in the grammar of the language. Tone can differentiate the meaning of words as well as distinguish different grammatical constructions.

A number of people object to the use of tone marks in writing simply because it is not used in English, and so they consider it untidy. They seem to forget that English is not a tone language in the same way Urhobo is. Whether you say "clear" with a high, mid, or low tone, the meaning is the same in English. But as we have seen, a change in tone can change the meaning of words in Urhobo. If tone is not marked in writing, many sentences would be ambiguous, and much time and meaning would be lost.