Determination of Lead and Cadmium Contents in Dry Cell Batteries Available in Nigeria

ABSTRACT:
Lead (Pb) and cadmium (Cd) contents of different brands and sizes (N=38) of dry cell batteries (zinc-carbon Leclanché systems) available in Nigeria were determined by atomic absorption spectrometry after acid digestion. The average Pb and Cd content of the dry cells were 1077.9 ± 751.7 mg/kg (Range 42–3170 mg/kg) and 108.3 ± 81.4 mg/kg (Range 4.6–410 mg/kg), respectively. The mean Pb and Cd contents of dry cells with metal outer covers were significantly lower (p < 0.005) than the corresponding values for dry cells with non-metallic covers. The highest Pb and Cd values were observed in dry cell batteries imported from China. Higher mean Pb and Cd values were observed in dry cells from China (1368.36 vs. 151.47 mg/kg), compared to values for dry cells from Indonesia (1032 vs. 84.4 mg/kg), Japan (715.2 vs. 131.48 mg/kg), and Korea (1137.5 vs. 81.45 mg/kg). Lower Pb and Cd values were obtained in dry cells from Malaysia (709 vs. 12.5 mg/kg), Spain (702 vs. 65.8 mg/kg), the United States (303 vs. 11.1 mg/kg), and in the only surviving local brand (408 vs. 34.5 mg/kg). This study revealed an urgent need for an adequate, well-established system for the collection, separation, storage, and management of municipal and industrial wastes containing primary and secondary battery wastes, as well as similar toxic materials, to halt the open burning of such wastes in inhabited areas. There is a pressing need to develop appropriate technology in Nigeria that follows the principles of waste minimization and sustainable development.

The management of primary and secondary battery wastes is crucial to avoid or minimize inappropriate disposal, which could result in harm to both the environment and human health. Household batteries contribute 52% of Cd and 88% of Hg found in municipal solid waste, yet they comprise less than 1% of municipal solid waste by weight (Shapek, 1996). The toxicity and widespread pollution caused by lead is well known. In fact, lead has been described as the most severe environmental contaminant to arise in human civilization (Smith and Flegal, 1995). Although Pb is ubiquitous in the environment, it is primarily an anthropogenic pollutant. The polluting nature of the manufacturing processes of both primary and secondary batteries on the environment (Ward et al., 1977; Semu et al., 1986; Onianwa and Fakayode, 2000) and the adverse health effects on battery industry employees and their families have been well-established (Bader et al., 1999; Ritcher et al., 1979; Fergusson et al., 1981; Oleru et al., 1983). The lack of environmental protection equipment near battery and waste battery recycling facilities has been linked to increased Pb levels in human tissue samples (Wohl et al., 1996; Bader et al., 1999). The manufacture of dry cell batteries exposes employees to Pb, Mn, Zn, Cd, and suspended carbon black dust, which often contains polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). Exposure to carbon black dust in dry cell battery facilities results in significant loss in pulmonary function (Oleru et al., 1983). Higher levels of Pb and Mn have been observed in the body tissues of primary and secondary battery employees and their family members (Bader et al., 1999; Wohl et al., 1996; Lai et al., 1997). The high levels of Pb observed in the tissue samples of employees’ family members suggest a problem of lead dust being transferred home, likely through workers' clothing (Fergusson et al., 1981).

Dry cells are non-rechargeable and single-use, constituting household hazardous waste when "dead," i.e., when the components have reached their equilibrium concentrations. Open burning of wastes containing municipal and industrial wastes results in the emission of heavy metals into the atmosphere, which later settle as fly ash or dust on soils. This form of metal pollution has been classified as an environmental transfer of metal rather than a true source of metallic pollutants (Ayres and Ayres, 1994). The metals emitted must have originally been embedded in items of consumption that are discarded as waste. These toxic metals can be leached from ash and cinders into domestic surface waters through acidic wet precipitation, which may occur due to large-scale gas flaring in the Nigerian petroleum and natural gas sectors. This leaching process is enhanced by changes in pH, redox potential, and the presence of organic chelators. Highly acidic pH levels, as low as 3.4, have been observed in some natural surface waters in industrial areas of Nigeria (Sridhar and Bammeke, 1986). Such acidic conditions can increase the mobility of metals. The major streams in Nigeria's industrial cities are already heavily polluted by industrial waste (Ajayi and Osibanjo, 1981) and pesticide residues (Nwankwoala and Osibanjo, 1992). The aim of the present study was to determine the Pb and Cd contents of dry cell batteries available in Nigeria to assess their contribution to environmental heavy metal pollution in the country.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Dry cells of different brands and sizes were purchased from retail outlets in Okigwe and Umuahia in Southeastern Nigeria. The dry cells were mainly of the Zn/MnO2 system. The brands of dry cells used in this study are shown in Table 1. The dry cells were carefully opened and dried to a constant weight for 12 hours at 110°C in an oven. The carbon rod and cathode mix (MnO2 + carbon + electrolyte) were ground in a porcelain mortar into a fine particle "black mix." To obtain a representative sample of the dry cell as discarded, a weight ratio of 2:3 was used for the metal cover and the black mix, respectively. 0.5 g of the sample was digested with a 2:1 mixture of HNO3/HCIO4. After the initial violent reaction, which caused the evolution of brown fumes, had subsided (approximately 10 minutes), the digestion flask was covered with a watchglass and digested at 150°C in a regulated programmable aluminum digestion block. The sample was then treated with two portions of the HNO3/HCIO4 mixture and evaporated to near dryness. More acid mixture was added, and the digestion continued until dense white fumes were evolved, signaling the completion of the process. The sample was then evaporated to near dryness and taken up in 1M HNO3, filtered through pre-acid-washed Whatman No. 4 filter paper into a 10 ml volumetric flask, and made up to the mark with 1M HNO3. The sample was subsequently analyzed for Pb and Cd using flame atomic absorption spectrophotometry (Buck Scientific, Model 210). Internal quality control procedures, including re-tests of standards, were undertaken. A recovery study of the total analytical procedure was carried out by spiking portions of two previously analyzed brands with varying concentrations of Pb and Cd. These were homogenized, redried, and passed through the digestion and analytical steps. Results are reported as averages of duplicates.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Average recoveries of 81% and 91% were obtained for Pb and Cd, respectively. These low recoveries may be attributed to the high carbon content of the samples and its high adsorption power. Retention losses are also possible, as silica crucibles have been shown to retain an average of 16% Pb (Ajayi et al., 2001; Gorsuch, 1959). The mean (± SD) Pb and Cd content of the dry cells studied were 1077.9 ± 751.7 mg/kg (Range 42–3170 mg/kg) and 108.29 ± 81.41 mg/kg (Range 4.6–410 mg/kg), respectively. Due to the skewed nature of the results, the data were normalized using logarithmic transformation by calculating the geometric mean. A summary of the results obtained, categorized by the size of the dry cells, is shown in Table 2. The dry cells were grouped according to the type of outer cover and classified into 'Cd-free cells' and 'normal cells,' based on indications on their labels (Table 3). The mean Pb content of dry cells with non-metal covers (1325.0 ± 857.3 mg/kg) was significantly higher (p < 0.005) than the corresponding value for dry cells with metal covers (682.5 ± 307.2 mg/kg). Similarly, the mean Cd content of dry cells with non-metal covers (141.9 ± 82.3 mg/kg) was significantly higher (p < 0.005) than those of dry cells with metal covers (54.5 ± 47.9 mg/kg), as shown in Table 3. This suggests that dry cells with improved packaging are more environmentally friendly. In Nigeria, dry cells with metal covers are, on average, 25% costlier. This improved metal outer packaging reduces leakages, even with abusive use of the dry cells.

About a third of the dry cells studied (36%) were imported from China. The higher mean Pb and Cd contents of these Chinese dry cells compared to cells from other countries (Tables 4) may be explained by the fact that more than 90% of these cells have non-metal outer covers. The mean Pb and Cd content of the 'Cd-Free' dry cells (919.4 ± 660.7 mg/kg and 89.6 ± 60.5 mg/kg, respectively) were lower than the corresponding values for normal cells (1292.1 ± 811.5 mg/kg and 112.5 ± 90.6 mg/kg, respectively). The presence of large amounts of carbon black in the electrodes of dry cells also explains the high levels of Pb and Cd observed in the batteries. The tendency of dry cell batteries to discharge contaminants such as Mn, Zn, Cd, and Pb into the environment is compounded by the absence of recycling and proper disposal systems in Nigeria. When 'dead' dry cells are improperly disposed of, these toxic metals can seep into the environment and cause harm to human health. More efficient management of waste batteries should be developed.

CONCLUSION:
This study highlights the potentially toxic effects of Pb and Cd contamination from dry cell batteries and stresses the need for better waste management practices and the use of safer, more sustainable materials. The results point to a pressing need for policies and programs to address battery waste disposal in Nigeria and other parts of Africa. Through improved recycling systems and technology that align with sustainable development principles, significant environmental and health hazards can be minimized.