Effect of Heat Processing on the Proximate Composition and Energy Values of Selected Nigerian Staple Foods from Oil-Producing Areas of the Niger Delta

Abstract
The proximate composition and energy values of four raw and heat-processed staple foods (yams, cassava, cocoyam, and maize) from oil-producing areas (Eleme, Ogoni, Okrika, and Nembe) in Rivers and Bayelsa States, and Abakaliki (a non-oil-producing area in Ebonyi State, Nigeria) as a control, were investigated. In raw yam tubers, moisture content was high in all locations, ranging from 61.96 ± 0.02% in Abakaliki to 63.77 ± 0.25% in Ogoni. Crude protein ranged from 1.39 ± 0.13% in Okrika to 1.71 ± 0.06% in Abakaliki, while ash content was highest (2.57 ± 0.12%) in Okrika, followed by 2.33 ± 0.01% in Eleme and lowest (0.97 ± 0.06%) in Abakaliki. Crude fat was low across all locations, ranging from 0.10 ± 0.00% in Okrika to 0.17 ± 0.01% in Nembe, while total carbohydrate was high in all locations, ranging from 33.32 ± 0.42% in Ogoni to 35.21 ± 0.13% in Abakaliki. The calorific value (kcal/100g sample) in all locations was low. It was highest (149.08) in yams from Abakaliki, followed by Eleme (142.55), and lowest in Ogoni (140.09). Similar trends were observed for raw cassava, cocoyam, and maize from different oil-producing and control locations. In each of these locations, heat processing generally increased the moisture content of all samples (yam, cassava, cocoyam, and maize), but decreased dry matter, crude protein, ash, crude fat, total carbohydrate, and calorific value. With the exception of moisture and ash, other nutrients were significantly (p < 0.05) higher in the control area of Abakaliki than those in similar samples from oil-producing areas of the Niger Delta.

Introduction
Nigeria is divided into 36 states and the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja, which are further divided into six geopolitical zones (Northeast, Northwest, Northcentral, Southeast, Southwest, and South-south). Rivers and Bayelsa are two states in the oil-producing Niger Delta region of Nigeria, where staple foods such as yam, cassava, cocoyam, and maize are abundant, though these staples are seasonal. Oil-producing areas (Eleme, Ogoni, Okrika, and Nembe) are heavily impacted by petroleum exploration and exploitation, which has led to widespread pollution of farmlands (soils), rivers, and underground water with hydrocarbons and dispersant products.

Crude oil spills on soil and the indiscriminate discharge of effluents on farmlands contaminate the soil and water bed, making them polluted and unsuitable for agricultural purposes. Crude oil spillage adversely affects plants by making toxic minerals in the soil available to plants and by reducing the soil pH. When soil pH drops below 4.50, the productivity of most crops is adversely affected. The people of Rivers and Bayelsa States are predominantly subsistence farmers, and the bulk of plant nutrients (carbohydrates, fats, proteins, ash, moisture, and fiber) in their diets are derived from the consumption of staple foods (starchy root tubers, cereals, and legumes).

Foods are required by humans for growth, development, reproduction, and energy. The poor nutritional status of Nigerians and malnutrition-related disorders are caused by a combination of factors such as pollution, low productivity and quality, and the presence of toxicants in foods, which need to be eliminated through heat treatment. For instance, heat treatment has been shown to inactivate trypsin inhibitors from the African yam bean.

Yams are species of Dioscorea and belong to the Dioscoreaceae family. They are propagated from tubers and grow best in deep, well-drained soils. Yams are peeled, boiled, and pounded to produce a gelatinous dough called pounded yam, which is consumed with soup. Yam flour is used as a local soup thickener to prepare dishes such as afiaefere or white soup and is a good source of starch. Cassava (Manihot esculenta) is a root crop from the Euphorbiaceae family, propagated from stem cuttings. The root is an affordable source of carbohydrates for both humans and livestock.

Fermented cassava roots are boiled and pounded into a thick paste called fufu, which is consumed with soup. The root can be cooked and eaten with red palm oil and sauces. The roots may also be peeled, grated, fermented, and fried with or without red palm oil to make garri flour, which is widely consumed in Nigeria. Taro cocoyam (Colocasia esculenta) and tannia species (Xanthosoma sagittifolium) are common members of the Araceae family. The young leaves of taro cocoyam are consumed in Nigeria, as well as other West African countries, as vegetable food for ruminants, particularly sheep and goats. Cocoyam is a good source of carbohydrates and energy and is usually eaten boiled or roasted.