Staff
A peculiar responsibility of anyone charged with the management of university education in Nigeria or anywhere else, is the daunting task of managing an enormous pool of human resources. The true quality of a university is determined by the calibre of staff, both academic and non-academic, that it possesses. The university is a place of learning and scholarship where the highest standards are expected. At the best of times, the staff—especially academic staff—are supposed to be inspired by the greatest ideals of scholarship and conduct. This comes about when they are motivated by the provision of adequate equipment and facilities to work with, and when they are paid wages that enable them to concentrate all their energies on teaching and research. Unfortunately, this has not been the situation in Nigeria in the last two decades. The harsh environment and inadequate salaries have led to the brain-drain syndrome. But a more deadly effect of the situation has been the almost complete breakdown of moral consciousness and adherence to the ideals of the teaching profession. Much of what passes for normal university culture has disappeared, and there is a frightening degree of delinquency among staff.
The need to re-direct staff, to coax and cajole them back to the primary vision and mission of the university, is one of the grave duties of the manager of university education at this time. The temptation to make quick and easy money by exploiting students has diverted the attention of many academic staff from research. Even in difficult times, our universities must strive to remain at the cutting edge of knowledge, to create and contribute new knowledge. University education should be so managed as to ensure that quality teaching is going on and equipment for research is provided. These are the raison d'etre of universities.
To facilitate the attempt to keep quality research and familiarity with current scholarship in the forefront, Nigerian universities should take the establishment of linkages and exchange programmes with African and overseas universities seriously. Any university that is out of date is dead. The provision and maintenance of good academic staff deserve critical attention as attempts are made to reposition our universities for proper performance. The fact that academia is no longer the first choice of many bright undergraduates, and that many lecturers are now only secondarily interested in teaching and research, should be a cause for concern.
The area of the relationship between staff and management is delicate and should be the business of the manager. University staff are outspoken, know their rights, are aware of the rules, and insist on conscientious welfare packages. While management must ensure discipline and that staff perform their duties, the leadership of the university should run an open administration with which everyone can identify. Some of the tensions that plague our universities result from preferential treatments given to some members of staff where the leadership is unable to be even-handed and fair.

Students
Students represent the largest segment of the university community. They are partly the reason for the establishment of universities, and their fortunes in the university are a litmus test for good management of university education. They are vulnerable, they are the recipients of the education offered by the institutions, and their quality partly determines the success or failure of the system. They are also extremely impressionistic, critical, and problematic; good student management is part of the question of the vision of the university. One sad aspect of student management on campus is the belief among the radical and activist few that students must confront the administration and that the only way they can make their presence felt is by causing crises and disrupting the orderly running of sessions. Good university management would recognize this tendency and devise strategies to repudiate such culture and tradition.
Students seem to suffer the decay in the system in some very special ways, right from when they are admitted into the university to the end of their programmes. For many of them, their first experience of a university during their admission is not of a place inhabited by gods who are upright and decent, but by clay-footed and corrupt individuals who extort money from them before they are admitted. No good university management should tolerate this unhealthy situation. Admission scores introduce distortions that must be removed from university education. Some of the violence and frustration that students exhibit in their demonstrations can be traced to the perceived injustice they experience.
In this connection, the government's admission policy is faulty and needs to be reviewed. The recent redefinition of catchment areas, which officially encourages the concentration of people from certain tribal groups in different universities, promotes ethnicity and defeats one of the missions of the university: to promote national unity through a citizenry liberated by education. Many candidates who are prima-facie qualified for admission lose out because they come from outside certain geographical zones. If this policy must be maintained, it will be advisable to increase the percentage reserved for candidates admitted on merit to fifty percent (50%) of the total number that applied for a particular course, and the other prescribed permutations for admission used for the rest. But it is perhaps best to loosen the stranglehold of the Joint Admission and Matriculation Board (JAMB). JAMB should not be involved in admissions per se. The results of the University Matriculation Examinations should be a guide to individual universities in making their choice of candidates. Universities may also decide to adopt additional steps to ensure that they get the calibre of students they want. Such a step will also save JAMB from some of the unsavoury criticisms that have been levelled against it of late, especially the allegation that the performances of some high-scoring candidates in the UME bear no relationship to the capabilities they demonstrate in class on admission. The idea of catchment areas should be reviewed, even if priorities are going to be made for some groups.
A disheartening feature of Nigerian universities and the despair of most managers of our universities in the last two decades has been the high degree of indiscipline among university students. Apart from the fact that students have active and inquiring minds, have high expectations that can be easily disappointed, they are generally impatient, at times irritating, and enjoy letting off steam before they realize the amount of damage they have caused. In some cases, they are also instigated by mischievous members of staff and some political forces outside. All these lead to situations of disorder that often cause harm, even death, and the frequent closures of our universities. For the manager of the university, this is one of the most unwelcome experiences because it means the students are out of school for several months and do not get the education they should.
The most harrowing indication of the breakdown of discipline is the demonic feature of cults and cultism on almost every campus. At the last count, there were more than forty cult groups among both men and women in our university system. And reports show that they have also spread to the secondary schools. Several historical and sociological studies have been made of this menace in attempts to understand and stamp it out. Over and above all the brilliant suggestions that have been made, it seems clear that the main problem can be located in the breakdown of moral order and the erosion of the essential culture of the university: the pursuit of truth, the sense of right and wrong, adherence to civilised and decent ways, devotion to scholarship and research at different levels, development of potentials in sports and the arts, community service, interest in mental and spiritual development, and innocent fun. If our universities were seen as communities where certain practices were forbidden by the sheer force of their traditions, and were stamped out as soon as they reared their heads—barring interference from outside—cultism would have been contained. The operation of cults on campuses does not provide the right conditions for learning. To improve discipline among students, three important steps need to be taken: attention to student welfare, serious counselling of students, and a lifting of the moral tone of the universities. Students should be made to understand that as adults, they are fully responsible for their actions, and the law would take its full course in cases of infraction. In this regard, one of the worst syndromes that has polluted university education here is the sickness of examination malpractices. They betray not only the moral vacuity of our students and the denigration of the most important aspect of their training, but also their lack of confidence in the university. This problem must be eliminated in our universities.
Finally, it is possible that one of the reasons for the persistence of almost identical forms of violence and cultism in our universities, to the complete negation of what true university education stands for, is the insularity of our situation. In spite of the explosion in the information market, few of our students seem to know what their counterparts in other parts of the world are doing, their concerns, and their views on education for sustainable development. To complement what little our students get from the clamorous local programmes, we should devise strategies to enable them to travel to other universities outside the country either on short-term visits or exchange programmes. The importance of travel as part of education has always been recognised, and now that our system here seems to have been so polluted, such a tonic will help rejuvenate and re-direct our university communities as we seek to pull them back from the brink of disaster. In Europe, the ERASMUS and SOCRATES groups are popular travel bands of students, and the experiences they acquire not only encourage comparison and cross-fertilisation of ideas but also lead to richer personal development.

The Unions
The revolutions in labour relations matters of the seventies and eighties impacted significantly on the nation's universities. Hitherto, full-blown unionism was anathema to the universities. However, with the new trend in the country and in the spirit of democracy, the Academic Staff Union of Universities (ASUU) was granted the full status of a trade union to protect the interests of academic staff of Nigerian universities. Thereafter, the non-academic staff also organized themselves into the Senior Staff Association of Nigerian Universities (SSANU) and the Non-Academic Staff Union (NASU) as pressure groups in the university. The students have always had the National Association of Nigerian Students (NANS) and student unions in individual universities. These local unions have now been elevated to the status of governments and prefer to be known as Student Union Government (SUG).
The striking point about the existence of these staff unions on our university campuses is that they are national bodies only represented by chapters in the various universities. The implication of this structure is that the unions owe their allegiance elsewhere, outside their parent universities. University administrations have to contend with the harrowing pressures from the local branches and directives from the national headquarters of the various unions.
This thumbnail account of the unions on our university campuses immediately alerts any reader to the nightmare their various demands and activities constitute to university management. Indeed, Vice-Chancellors are the only Chief Executive Officers who have to contend with such a large number of labour unions in any organization. The ability of a Vice-Chancellor to manage his unions, assuage their intemperance, keep his university open throughout the session, and provide a peaceful learning environment is certainly an index of his leadership ability and determination that our universities should concentrate on their primary assignments of teaching and research. The unions' protest areas cover a wide range of perceived grievances; some serious, others trivial, and still others plainly mischievous. Some of the unions have become tools in the hands of disreputable staff union leaders who merely use them to create problems for the administration.







