The Problem with Existing Works on Terrorism

It would appear that most of the existing works on terrorism focus on treating the symptoms and effects rather than digging deep into the root causes of the problem in order to find a lasting solution. In most cases, the analyses lack objectivity, as people tend to stick to interpretations that suit their respective group interests. For instance, the Americans would like the world to believe that those who carry out terrorist acts are enemies of democracy. For example, in the 9/11 Commission Report, it was postulated that modern age terrorism is founded on a culture of hatred for the West, particularly America, stemming from deep religious differences, indoctrination, and idiosyncrasies, as well as the political failure of states that gained independence from the West. These failures have prevented these states from justifying the yearnings and aspirations that were once canvassed or from making sense of the powers they coveted and were granted. In other words, it was argued that gross economic failures and the resulting social repression in these states created a large volume of animosity among their citizens, and the helplessness and frustration of the governments fueled the resentment of the populace.

Osama bin Laden was viewed in the report as a person with myopic, disoriented, parochial, mindless, and spurious beliefs, who was able to garner huge support from the Islamic world by using cultural and religious allusions to the Holy Quran and its interpreters. According to the report, Osama bin Laden "appeals to people disoriented by cyclonic change as they confront modernity and globalization," while his rhetoric "selectively draws from multiple sources—Islam, history, and the region's political and economic malaise."

It is broadly opined by America that the Islamic world (or a minor faction of it, as diplomatically put by President Bush) is against America as the inventor and protagonist of civilization, which has erased or obliterated the caliphate, a system of government that is secular and pluralistic in nature. The U.S. was also accused of forestalling all attempts made by Islamic fundamentalists to wrest power back from the secular rulers in places such as Egypt, Yemen, and Algeria.

The U.S., however, believes that the failure of Islamic fundamentalists to play pivotal roles in obtaining independence led to their relative ease of being excluded from evolving governments in the post-colonial Arab Middle Eastern world. By extension, the U.S. posits that the allegations of championing anti-Islamic tenets leveled against the West stemmed from this root. To the U.S., the situation was further exacerbated by the failure of governments formed in post-colonial Africa and the Arab Middle East, which once had pride and optimism but have since descended into units of indifference, cynicism, and despair. The U.S. accused even the secular regimes in the Arab Middle East of gross failure in enunciating and executing sustainable developmental programs, instead squandering their oil wealth in "an attempt to shortcut decades of development." The governments were unable to sustain infrastructural and social welfare programs due to a drastic cut in oil revenues in the 1980s, which led to deep resentment from their citizens. The U.S. blamed the unempirical ideologies postulated by the selfish and corrupt political leaders of the Middle East Arab states, as well as the rulers' desire for a monopoly on the nation's wealth, as major causes of hostilities from their citizenry. In all, the U.S. exonerated itself from any complicity in the systems that evolved in those polities, though it seems to forget its sometimes overbearing involvement in the economics and politics of different states at different times.

Another major factor ignored by the U.S. in its judgment of the situation is the wide world of difference in the religious beliefs and tenets of the West versus those of the terrorists, which bin Laden simply summarizes as: "We desire death more than you desire life." Suicide in most forms is not only prohibitive in the Western world, it is also undeniably illegal. Conversely, altruistic or religious suicide in the Islamic world is regarded as an open gateway to paradise, or so we are made to believe, especially through bin Laden's selective interpretations, which he uses to indoctrinate his followers.

From the foregoing, it is crystal clear that terrorism and counter-terrorism are a chain of causation and results—a circle of actions, reactions, and counteractions. While the terrorists believe that their right to self-determination has, from the outset, been and is continuously being trampled upon by the U.S., the latter is aggrieved by what it regards as a mindless attack and declaration of "fatwa" on its citizenry, followed by subsequent undue attacks culminating in the epoch-making phenomenon of 9/11. The U.S. therefore seeks to redress the situation by arresting the trend, and in doing so, many fundamental rights naturally and legally accruable to a living being have been and are being violated. The situation creates a delicate web woven around vice and virtue. Two wrongs do not make a right, and hence one indecorum cannot be substituted for another.

Terrorism and Human Rights

Human rights, also known as natural rights or fundamental rights, relate to certain freedoms or privileges that are considered an innate part of the human person, which cannot be denied by society. They are rights that every human being should enjoy by virtue of being human and hence are often referred to as inalienable rights. Although different societies hold different views about fundamental human rights, the most commonly agreed-upon rights include the right to life, right to safety, right to work, right to pursue happiness, the right to equality before the law, and a whole range of personal freedoms, including freedom of expression, worship, and association.

The United Nations Agreements on Human Rights recognize, inter alia, freedom of thought, conscience, and religion, freedom of opinion and expression, freedom of assembly and association, the right to privacy and protection of that privacy by law, and the right to be recognized as a person before the law. The Convention forbids torture, inhuman and degrading treatment, slavery or involuntary servitude, and arbitrary arrest and detention. The Convention also forbids propaganda advocating either war or hatred based on race, religion, national origin, or language. It restricts the death penalty to the most serious crimes and guarantees the right of condemned people to seek commutation to a lesser penalty.

The Convention bans acts committed with the intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnic, racial, or religious group. It declares genocide a crime under international law, whether committed during war or peacetime, and binds all signatories to the Convention to take measures to prevent and punish any act of genocide committed within their jurisdictions. Also banned is the killing of members of any racial, ethnic, national, or religious group because of their membership in that group, causing serious bodily or mental harm to members of the group, inflicting conditions of life intended to destroy them, imposing measures intended to prevent births within the group, or taking their children away from them and giving them to members of another group. It declares genocide, conspiracy, or incitement to commit or complicity in the commission of genocide to be illegal. Individuals are to be held responsible for these acts whether they were acting in their official capacities or as private individuals. Signatories to the Convention are requested to enact appropriate legislation to make the acts named in Article 3 illegal under their national laws and provide penalties for violators.

There is also a UN Convention against torture, wherein torture is defined, and countries are forbidden to return a refugee to his country if it is believed that he/she will be tortured. The United Nations also, in a well-considered resolution, declared that terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, wherever and whenever committed, can never be justified in any instance, including as a means to promote and protect human rights. It declares the right to life as the most basic and essential of all human rights.