Cervical Cancer: The Silent Killer

Cancer is an umbrella term for more than 100 life-threatening diseases characterized by the uncontrolled, abnormal growth of malignant cells. These harmful cells may spread locally to adjacent tissues or to other locations in the body through the bloodstream or lymphatic system. Cancer may affect people of all ages, but the risk for most varieties increases with age. Cancer causes about 13% of all deaths. According to the American Cancer Society, 7.6 million people died from cancer worldwide in 2007.

Cervical cancer has been proven to be caused by a virus called the Human Papilloma Virus (HPV). The global prevalence of HPV in cervical carcinoma is 99.7%. Over 100 types of HPV have been discovered, with at least 13 genotypes associated with cancer. The eight most common high-risk genotypes (HPV 16, 18, 45, 31, 33, 52, 58, and 35) account for 90% of cases of cervical cancer. Apart from HPV 16 and 18, each individual genotype causes a small (5%) proportion of cases. HPV 16 and 18 account for more than 70% of all cervical cancers worldwide. HPV 31 and 45 are implicated in about 4% of the cases. The low-risk HPV genotypes can cause genital warts or low-grade lesions on the cervical surface. Between 90% and 100% of genital warts are caused by HPV genotypes 6 and 11.

Worldwide, cervical cancer is a major cause of cancer-related morbidity and mortality in women. It continues to be the second most common female cancer worldwide after breast carcinoma. The prevalence of genital HPV infection in the world is around 440 million. It is estimated that there were almost 260,000 deaths from cervical cancer in 2005, and 2.7 million years of life lost. About 500,000 cases of cervical cancer are estimated to occur each year, and over 80% of which occur in developing countries where neither population-based routine screening nor optimal treatment is available. The highest estimated incidence rates of cervical cancer occur in Africa, Central and South America, and Asia. In Nigeria, very few women are screened for cervical cancer; in fact, it is estimated that only 10% of female physicians in Nigeria have ever had a Pap smear themselves. In another study conducted in a tertiary institution in Nigeria, seventy-one percent were aware of cervical cancer, while only 33 percent were aware of Papanicolaou's smear. It is estimated that without a significant improvement in prevention, there will be a million new cases of HPV by the year 2049.

Predisposing factors to HPV infection include sexual activity, prior Sexually Transmitted Infections, early sexual debut, prolonged use of birth control pills, women who smoke, and having same-sex or multiple sexual partners. Genital HPV infection is extremely common and most often causes no symptoms. HPV is transmitted through sexual intercourse; however, transmission can occur without penetrative sex, as HPV is transmitted through skin-to-skin contact in the genital area. Therefore, every sexually active woman is at risk. 50-80% of women will acquire an HPV infection in their lifetime, and up to 50% of those infections will be oncogenic HPV types. Progressions from HPV infection to Cervical Cancer are slow and usually take years. Hence, the infection is usually more prevalent among women aged 35-50.

Cervical cancer is preventable and treatable if detected early. Vaccination with an HPV vaccine is credited with reducing both the incidence and death rate from cervical cancer. Gardasil, a prophylactic quadrivalent vaccine manufactured by Merck & Co. and licensed in many countries, is designed to protect against HPV 16 and 18 and also protects against low-risk genotypes 6 and 11. Administration of three doses at intervals of 2 months between doses 1 and 2; 6 months between doses 1 and 3 in females and males aged 9–15 years with Merck’s HPV vaccine will reduce the incidence of low-grade and high-grade lesions, infection with vaccine HPV types, long-term duration of protection, and robust anti-HPV responses when administered with other common vaccines. Thereby, reducing the physical, emotional, and financial burden of managing HPV disease. GSK’s Cervarix is a bivalent vaccine with only HPV 16 and 18.

Secondary prevention is done through screening and treatment of identified pre-cancerous lesions. Screening methods include Pap Smear, Visual Inspection with Acetic Acid, Visual Inspection with Lugol’s Iodine, HPV DNA Testing, Hybrid Capture® 2 Test (HC-2), and The Fast HPV test. Pap smear screening in developed countries has contributed to an 80% reduction in the incidence of cervical cancer. Hysterectomy, Chemotherapy, and Radiotherapy are mostly used as tertiary interventions.

According to the World Health Organization, preliminary data show that HPV vaccination may be cost-effective in developing countries. Currently, in Uganda, the Programme for Appropriate Technology in Health (PATH) in close collaboration with the local Ministry of Health and other partners is piloting HPV vaccine introduction. The piloting has also been carried out in India, Vietnam, and Peru. The governments of developing countries, including Nigeria, need cancer policies and to step up media enlightenment in the fight against cervical cancer, which is not only a health concern but also a social, economic, and psychological burden. Operation Stop Cervical Cancer Nigeria (SCCAN) and other relevant organizations should join hands in preventing cervical cancer in Nigerian women.