MWEB Introduces HN 7740S with VoIP

MWEB Nigeria has introduced another innovation, the new Hughes HN 7740S modem to the Nigerian market.

A statement made available to THISDAY disclosed that the Hughes HN 7740S modem is a high-performance broadband satellite router with many technologically advanced features, including Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP), support for broadband over satellite data capabilities, and advanced compression techniques to ensure optimal data transmission.

Another key feature of the HN 7740S modem is its high resilience to changing weather conditions, automatically adapting to conditions to ensure optimal performance regardless of weather conditions.

MWEB Nigeria's VSAT Manager, Dotun Faseru, said, "The HN 7740S enables applications such as telephony connectivity for remote branch offices, VoIP services for small to medium enterprises, combined payphone and internet connectivity, high-speed internet/intranet access, video services including remote site security monitoring, diverse satellite backup of primary broadband access, interactive distance education with two-way VoIP connectivity, and real-time multimedia streaming and large file content distribution."

The HNS DW7740DVB-S2 modem used by MWEB is VoIP ready and comes with two usable voice ports; therefore, no additional Voice Appliance equipment will be required unless the customer requires more than two iWay VoIP telephone lines over the PingTone platform.

MWEB stressed that it has competitively positioned this new product against other VoIP service providers and reiterates that its VoIP service is cost-efficient and affordable to large corporate customers and small business users. It enables clear quality voice calls through its Quality of Service (QoS) function and guarantees enough bandwidth for its voice channel on dedicated bandwidth.

It also provides unsurpassed performance for even the most bandwidth-intensive applications, allowing both voice and data applications to work seamlessly with each other over the same satellite connection.

The HN 7740S has the flexibility to handle a wide range of business IP networking requirements for large-scale businesses, with the support of two simultaneous LAN subnets and two-wire simultaneous Foreign Exchange Subscriber (FXS) analog voice ports, allowing for clear and quality voice calls.

MWEB Nigeria's Network Operations Center (NOC) has an inbuilt Adaptive Coding Modulation (ACM) on the outbound channel to allow it to gain significant bandwidth efficiencies and provide high availability services, especially during unfavorable weather conditions. Once MWEB's NOC senses a signal degradation on the modem, it sends more power to the modem automatically to prevent a loss of connection, ensuring that MWEB's clients can still work optimally during rainstorms, providing customers with unsurpassed network connectivity throughout the day.

MWEB Nigeria's General Manager, John Ugbe, said, "Customers can now receive incoming calls from any voice network, including fixed telephone lines and GSM lines. This will also enable our business customers to send facsimile (fax) documents using conventional fax equipment on the iWay VoIP line, making business operations smoother. Each line activated on iWayVAP (voice appliance) will be assigned a number, and all calls originated from iWayVAP will display the caller's identity to enable customers to see beforehand who is calling them," he concluded.