Microsoft Releases Free Antivirus Software
As Users and Security Experts Give It a Passing Grade
Competitors Criticize the Product

Microsoft Corporation has released an antivirus software named Microsoft Security Essentials. The software, which was released last week, has been downloaded by numerous Windows users across the globe.

The product, according to Microsoft, is free and can be downloaded by anyone using the Security Essentials website. Versions are available for Windows XP, Vista, and 7. Also, no registration is required, and the software can be installed on any number of PCs without restrictions.

Security Essentials, launched last Tuesday, is basic antivirus and anti-spyware software that Microsoft touts as suitable for users who cannot or will not pay for security.

Microsoft Security Essentials provides real-time protection that uses behavior monitoring and reputation services to help identify malicious software as soon as it emerges in the ecosystem. It then uses the Dynamic Signature Service to make the newest definitions available virtually real-time, without having to wait for the next signature download.

Microsoft Security Essentials, as learned by PC User to User, takes over from Windows Live OneCare, a commercial offering that was phased out in June, and it focuses on something much broader in its offering.

Although Security Essentials is free, it will not be installed with Windows or provided as an automatic update. Microsoft Security Essentials runs quietly and efficiently in the background, allowing you to use your Windows-based PC as desired without interruptions or long wait times.

Since the release of the software, several security testing firms have conducted tests to ascertain the potency of the software. One such test was conducted by av-test.org.

To check known static malware, AV-Test pitted Security Essentials against the most recent WildList, a sampling of 3,732 viruses and other threats. Microsoft's product successfully detected and blocked all of the samples in both manual and active scanning.

Microsoft will block users running counterfeit copies of Windows from installing the free Security Essentials antivirus software. All efforts, according to Microsoft, will be put in place to curb the activities of pirates. During installation, users will be asked to validate Windows running on their PC to ensure its authenticity.

However, other anti-malware companies, especially Symantec, have continued to react to the release of MSE. They believe Microsoft is not known for security and that their newly released antivirus software might not stand the test of time. Symantec referred to Security Essentials as a rehash of Windows Live OneCare, a security software from Microsoft that is now defunct.

Symantec also holds that MSE was made available for free by Microsoft due to its inferior quality and incapability to effectively combat viruses.

Regarding the rationale for offering MSE at no cost, Microsoft explained that they believe many of their customers worldwide do not have up-to-date protection either because they cannot afford it, are concerned about the impact on the performance of their PCs, or are simply unaware that their antivirus software is outdated.

The software is still available for download on the Microsoft website and other authorized websites that have the link to Microsoft.